{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Project Gutenberg\'92s Alice\'92s Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or\
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org\
\
\
Title: Alice\'92s Adventures in Wonderland\
\
Author: Lewis Carroll\
\
Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #11]\
Release Date: March, 1994\
Last Updated: October 6, 2016\
\
Language: English\
\
Character set encoding: UTF-8\
\
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE\'92S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
ALICE\'92S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND\
\
Lewis Carroll\
\
THE MILLENNIUM FULCRUM EDITION 3.0\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER I. Down the Rabbit-Hole\
\
Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the\
bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the\
book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in\
it, \'91and what is the use of a book,\'92 thought Alice \'91without pictures or\
conversations?\'92\
\
So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the\
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure\
of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and\
picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran\
close by her.\
\
There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so\
VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, \'91Oh dear!\
Oh dear! I shall be late!\'92 (when she thought it over afterwards, it\
occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time\
it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH\
OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on,\
Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had\
never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch\
to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field\
after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large\
rabbit-hole under the hedge.\
\
In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how\
in the world she was to get out again.\
\
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then\
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think\
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep\
well.\
\
Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had\
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was\
going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what\
she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she\
looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with\
cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures\
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as\
she passed; it was labelled \'91ORANGE MARMALADE\'92, but to her great\
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear\
of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as\
she fell past it.\
\
\'91Well!\'92 thought Alice to herself, \'91after such a fall as this, I shall\
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they\'92ll all think me at\
home! Why, I wouldn\'92t say anything about it, even if I fell off the top\
of the house!\'92 (Which was very likely true.)\
\
Down, down, down. Would the fall NEVER come to an end! \'91I wonder how\
many miles I\'92ve fallen by this time?\'92 she said aloud. \'91I must be getting\
somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four\
thousand miles down, I think--\'92 (for, you see, Alice had learnt several\
things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this\
was not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there\
was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over)\
\'91--yes, that\'92s about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude\
or Longitude I\'92ve got to?\'92 (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or\
Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)\
\
Presently she began again. \'91I wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH the\
earth! How funny it\'92ll seem to come out among the people that walk with\
their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think--\'92 (she was rather glad\
there WAS no one listening, this time, as it didn\'92t sound at all the\
right word) \'91--but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country\
is, you know. Please, Ma\'92am, is this New Zealand or Australia?\'92 (and\
she tried to curtsey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you\'92re falling\
through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) \'91And what an\
ignorant little girl she\'92ll think me for asking! No, it\'92ll never do to\
ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.\'92\
\
Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began\
talking again. \'91Dinah\'92ll miss me very much to-night, I should think!\'92\
(Dinah was the cat.) \'91I hope they\'92ll remember her saucer of milk at\
tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no\
mice in the air, I\'92m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that\'92s very\
like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?\'92 And here Alice\
began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy\
sort of way, \'91Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?\'92 and sometimes, \'91Do\
bats eat cats?\'92 for, you see, as she couldn\'92t answer either question,\
it didn\'92t much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing\
off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with\
Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, \'91Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:\
did you ever eat a bat?\'92 when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon\
a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.\
\
Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:\
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another\
long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.\
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and\
was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, \'91Oh my ears\
and whiskers, how late it\'92s getting!\'92 She was close behind it when she\
turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found\
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging\
from the roof.\
\
There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when\
Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every\
door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to\
get out again.\
\
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid\
glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice\'92s\
first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall;\
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,\
but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second\
time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and\
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the\
little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!\
\
Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not\
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage\
into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of\
that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and\
those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the\
doorway; \'91and even if my head would go through,\'92 thought poor Alice, \'91it\
would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could\
shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin.\'92\
For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately,\
that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really\
impossible.\
\
There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went\
back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at\
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this\
time she found a little bottle on it, [\'91which certainly was not here\
before,\'92 said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper\
label, with the words \'91DRINK ME\'92 beautifully printed on it in large\
letters.\
\
It was all very well to say \'91Drink me,\'92 but the wise little Alice was\
not going to do THAT in a hurry. \'91No, I\'92ll look first,\'92 she said, \'91and\
see whether it\'92s marked \'93poison\'94 or not\'92; for she had read several nice\
little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild\
beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they WOULD not remember\
the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot\
poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your\
finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never\
forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked \'91poison,\'92 it is\
almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.\
\
However, this bottle was NOT marked \'91poison,\'92 so Alice ventured to taste\
it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour\
of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot\
buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
\'91What a curious feeling!\'92 said Alice; \'91I must be shutting up like a\
telescope.\'92\
\
And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face\
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going\
through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she\
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:\
she felt a little nervous about this; \'91for it might end, you know,\'92 said\
Alice to herself, \'91in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder\
what I should be like then?\'92 And she tried to fancy what the flame of a\
candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember\
ever having seen such a thing.\
\
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going\
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the\
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she\
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach\
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her\
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;\
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing\
sat down and cried.\
\
\'91Come, there\'92s no use in crying like that!\'92 said Alice to herself,\
rather sharply; \'91I advise you to leave off this minute!\'92 She generally\
gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),\
and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into\
her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having\
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,\
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.\
\'91But it\'92s no use now,\'92 thought poor Alice, \'91to pretend to be two people!\
Why, there\'92s hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!\'92\
\
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:\
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words\
\'91EAT ME\'92 were beautifully marked in currants. \'91Well, I\'92ll eat it,\'92 said\
Alice, \'91and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it\
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I\'92ll\
get into the garden, and I don\'92t care which happens!\'92\
\
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, \'91Which way? Which\
way?\'92, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was\
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same\
size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice\
had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way\
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on\
in the common way.\
\
So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER II. The Pool of Tears\
\
\'91Curiouser and curiouser!\'92 cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that\
for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); \'91now I\'92m\
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!\'92\
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of\
sight, they were getting so far off). \'91Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder\
who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I\'92m sure\
_I_ shan\'92t be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble\
myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;--but I must be\
kind to them,\'92 thought Alice, \'91or perhaps they won\'92t walk the way I want\
to go! Let me see: I\'92ll give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.\'92\
\
And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. \'91They must\
go by the carrier,\'92 she thought; \'91and how funny it\'92ll seem, sending\
presents to one\'92s own feet! And how odd the directions will look!\
\
     ALICE\'92S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.\
       HEARTHRUG,\
         NEAR THE FENDER,\
           (WITH ALICE\'92S LOVE).\
\
Oh dear, what nonsense I\'92m talking!\'92\
\
Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was\
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden\
key and hurried off to the garden door.\
\
Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to\
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more\
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.\
\
\'91You ought to be ashamed of yourself,\'92 said Alice, \'91a great girl like\
you,\'92 (she might well say this), \'91to go on crying in this way! Stop this\
moment, I tell you!\'92 But she went on all the same, shedding gallons of\
tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches\
deep and reaching half down the hall.\
\
After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and\
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White\
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in\
one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great\
hurry, muttering to himself as he came, \'91Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess!\
Oh! won\'92t she be savage if I\'92ve kept her waiting!\'92 Alice felt so\
desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit\
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, \'91If you please, sir--\'92\
The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan,\
and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.\
\
Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she\
kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: \'91Dear, dear! How\
queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.\
I wonder if I\'92ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the\
same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a\
little different. But if I\'92m not the same, the next question is, Who\
in the world am I? Ah, THAT\'92S the great puzzle!\'92 And she began thinking\
over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to\
see if she could have been changed for any of them.\
\
\'91I\'92m sure I\'92m not Ada,\'92 she said, \'91for her hair goes in such long\
ringlets, and mine doesn\'92t go in ringlets at all; and I\'92m sure I can\'92t\
be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a\
very little! Besides, SHE\'92S she, and I\'92m I, and--oh dear, how puzzling\
it all is! I\'92ll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me\
see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and\
four times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate!\
However, the Multiplication Table doesn\'92t signify: let\'92s try Geography.\
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, and\
Rome--no, THAT\'92S all wrong, I\'92m certain! I must have been changed for\
Mabel! I\'92ll try and say \'93How doth the little--\'93\'92 and she crossed her\
hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it,\
but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the\
same as they used to do:--\
\
     \'91How doth the little crocodile\
      Improve his shining tail,\
     And pour the waters of the Nile\
      On every golden scale!\
\
     \'91How cheerfully he seems to grin,\
      How neatly spread his claws,\
     And welcome little fishes in\
      With gently smiling jaws!\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m sure those are not the right words,\'92 said poor Alice, and her eyes\
filled with tears again as she went on, \'91I must be Mabel after all, and\
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to\
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I\'92ve\
made up my mind about it; if I\'92m Mabel, I\'92ll stay down here! It\'92ll be no\
use their putting their heads down and saying \'93Come up again, dear!\'94 I\
shall only look up and say \'93Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then,\
if I like being that person, I\'92ll come up: if not, I\'92ll stay down here\
till I\'92m somebody else\'94--but, oh dear!\'92 cried Alice, with a sudden burst\
of tears, \'91I do wish they WOULD put their heads down! I am so VERY tired\
of being all alone here!\'92\
\
As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see\
that she had put on one of the Rabbit\'92s little white kid gloves while\
she was talking. \'91How CAN I have done that?\'92 she thought. \'91I must\
be growing small again.\'92 She got up and went to the table to measure\
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now\
about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found\
out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped\
it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.\
\
\'91That WAS a narrow escape!\'92 said Alice, a good deal frightened at the\
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; \'91and\
now for the garden!\'92 and she ran with all speed back to the little door:\
but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was\
lying on the glass table as before, \'91and things are worse than ever,\'92\
thought the poor child, \'91for I never was so small as this before, never!\
And I declare it\'92s too bad, that it is!\'92\
\
As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash!\
she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she\
had somehow fallen into the sea, \'91and in that case I can go back by\
railway,\'92 she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in\
her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go\
to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the\
sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row\
of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon\
made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she\
was nine feet high.\
\
\'91I wish I hadn\'92t cried so much!\'92 said Alice, as she swam about, trying\
to find her way out. \'91I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by\
being drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure!\
However, everything is queer to-day.\'92\
\
Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way\
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought\
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small\
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had\
slipped in like herself.\
\
\'91Would it be of any use, now,\'92 thought Alice, \'91to speak to this mouse?\
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very\
likely it can talk: at any rate, there\'92s no harm in trying.\'92 So she\
began: \'91O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired\
of swimming about here, O Mouse!\'92 (Alice thought this must be the right\
way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but\
she remembered having seen in her brother\'92s Latin Grammar, \'91A mouse--of\
a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!\'92) The Mouse looked at her rather\
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,\
but it said nothing.\
\
\'91Perhaps it doesn\'92t understand English,\'92 thought Alice; \'91I daresay it\'92s\
a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.\'92 (For, with all\
her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago\
anything had happened.) So she began again: \'91Ou est ma chatte?\'92 which\
was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a\
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.\
\'91Oh, I beg your pardon!\'92 cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt\
the poor animal\'92s feelings. \'91I quite forgot you didn\'92t like cats.\'92\
\
\'91Not like cats!\'92 cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. \'91Would\
YOU like cats if you were me?\'92\
\
\'91Well, perhaps not,\'92 said Alice in a soothing tone: \'91don\'92t be angry\
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you\'92d\
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet\
thing,\'92 Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the\
pool, \'91and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and\
washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she\'92s\
such a capital one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!\'92 cried\
Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she\
felt certain it must be really offended. \'91We won\'92t talk about her any\
more if you\'92d rather not.\'92\
\
\'91We indeed!\'92 cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his\
tail. \'91As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always HATED\
cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don\'92t let me hear the name again!\'92\
\
\'91I won\'92t indeed!\'92 said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of\
conversation. \'91Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?\'92 The Mouse did not\
answer, so Alice went on eagerly: \'91There is such a nice little dog near\
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you\
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it\'92ll fetch things when\
you throw them, and it\'92ll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts\
of things--I can\'92t remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer,\
you know, and he says it\'92s so useful, it\'92s worth a hundred pounds! He\
says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!\'92 cried Alice in a sorrowful\
tone, \'91I\'92m afraid I\'92ve offended it again!\'92 For the Mouse was swimming\
away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in\
the pool as it went.\
\
So she called softly after it, \'91Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we\
won\'92t talk about cats or dogs either, if you don\'92t like them!\'92 When the\
Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its\
face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low\
trembling voice, \'91Let us get to the shore, and then I\'92ll tell you my\
history, and you\'92ll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.\'92\
\
It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the\
birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo,\
a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the\
way, and the whole party swam to the shore.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale\
\
They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank--the\
birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close\
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.\
\
The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a\
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural\
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had\
known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the\
Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, \'91I am older than\
you, and must know better\'92; and this Alice would not allow without\
knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its\
age, there was no more to be said.\
\
At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,\
called out, \'91Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! I\'92LL soon make you\
dry enough!\'92 They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse\
in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt\
sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.\
\
\'91Ahem!\'92 said the Mouse with an important air, \'91are you all ready? This\
is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! \'93William\
the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted\
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much\
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of\
Mercia and Northumbria--\'93\'92\
\
\'91Ugh!\'92 said the Lory, with a shiver.\
\
\'91I beg your pardon!\'92 said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: \'91Did\
you speak?\'92\
\
\'91Not I!\'92 said the Lory hastily.\
\
\'91I thought you did,\'92 said the Mouse. \'91--I proceed. \'93Edwin and Morcar,\
the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand,\
the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable--\'93\'92\
\
\'91Found WHAT?\'92 said the Duck.\
\
\'91Found IT,\'92 the Mouse replied rather crossly: \'91of course you know what\
\'93it\'94 means.\'92\
\
\'91I know what \'93it\'94 means well enough, when I find a thing,\'92 said the\
Duck: \'91it\'92s generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the\
archbishop find?\'92\
\
The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, \'91\'93--found\
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the\
crown. William\'92s conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his\
Normans--\'94 How are you getting on now, my dear?\'92 it continued, turning\
to Alice as it spoke.\
\
\'91As wet as ever,\'92 said Alice in a melancholy tone: \'91it doesn\'92t seem to\
dry me at all.\'92\
\
\'91In that case,\'92 said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, \'91I move\
that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic\
remedies--\'92\
\
\'91Speak English!\'92 said the Eaglet. \'91I don\'92t know the meaning of half\
those long words, and, what\'92s more, I don\'92t believe you do either!\'92 And\
the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds\
tittered audibly.\
\
\'91What I was going to say,\'92 said the Dodo in an offended tone, \'91was, that\
the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.\'92\
\
\'91What IS a Caucus-race?\'92 said Alice; not that she wanted much to know,\
but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY ought to speak,\
and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.\
\
\'91Why,\'92 said the Dodo, \'91the best way to explain it is to do it.\'92 (And, as\
you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell\
you how the Dodo managed it.)\
\
First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, [\'91the exact\
shape doesn\'92t matter,\'92 it said,) and then all the party were placed\
along the course, here and there. There was no \'91One, two, three, and\
away,\'92 but they began running when they liked, and left off when they\
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,\
when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again,\
the Dodo suddenly called out \'91The race is over!\'92 and they all crowded\
round it, panting, and asking, \'91But who has won?\'92\
\
This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought,\
and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead\
(the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pictures\
of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said,\
\'91EVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes.\'92\
\
\'91But who is to give the prizes?\'92 quite a chorus of voices asked.\
\
\'91Why, SHE, of course,\'92 said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger;\
and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused\
way, \'91Prizes! Prizes!\'92\
\
Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her\
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had\
not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly one\
a-piece all round.\
\
\'91But she must have a prize herself, you know,\'92 said the Mouse.\
\
\'91Of course,\'92 the Dodo replied very gravely. \'91What else have you got in\
your pocket?\'92 he went on, turning to Alice.\
\
\'91Only a thimble,\'92 said Alice sadly.\
\
\'91Hand it over here,\'92 said the Dodo.\
\
Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly\
presented the thimble, saying \'91We beg your acceptance of this elegant\
thimble\'92; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.\
\
Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave\
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything\
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she\
could.\
\
The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and\
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste\
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.\
However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and\
begged the Mouse to tell them something more.\
\
\'91You promised to tell me your history, you know,\'92 said Alice, \'91and why\
it is you hate--C and D,\'92 she added in a whisper, half afraid that it\
would be offended again.\
\
\'91Mine is a long and a sad tale!\'92 said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and\
sighing.\
\
\'91It IS a long tail, certainly,\'92 said Alice, looking down with wonder at\
the Mouse\'92s tail; \'91but why do you call it sad?\'92 And she kept on puzzling\
about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was\
something like this:--\
\
         \'91Fury said to a\
         mouse, That he\
        met in the\
       house,\
     \'93Let us\
      both go to\
       law: I will\
        prosecute\
         YOU.--Come,\
           I\'92ll take no\
           denial; We\
          must have a\
        trial: For\
      really this\
     morning I\'92ve\
    nothing\
    to do.\'94\
      Said the\
      mouse to the\
       cur, \'93Such\
        a trial,\
         dear Sir,\
            With\
          no jury\
        or judge,\
       would be\
      wasting\
      our\
      breath.\'94\
        \'93I\'92ll be\
        judge, I\'92ll\
         be jury,\'94\
             Said\
         cunning\
          old Fury:\
          \'93I\'92ll\
          try the\
            whole\
            cause,\
              and\
           condemn\
           you\
          to\
           death.\'94\'92\
\
\
\'91You are not attending!\'92 said the Mouse to Alice severely. \'91What are you\
thinking of?\'92\
\
\'91I beg your pardon,\'92 said Alice very humbly: \'91you had got to the fifth\
bend, I think?\'92\
\
\'91I had NOT!\'92 cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.\
\
\'91A knot!\'92 said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking\
anxiously about her. \'91Oh, do let me help to undo it!\'92\
\
\'91I shall do nothing of the sort,\'92 said the Mouse, getting up and walking\
away. \'91You insult me by talking such nonsense!\'92\
\
\'91I didn\'92t mean it!\'92 pleaded poor Alice. \'91But you\'92re so easily offended,\
you know!\'92\
\
The Mouse only growled in reply.\
\
\'91Please come back and finish your story!\'92 Alice called after it; and the\
others all joined in chorus, \'91Yes, please do!\'92 but the Mouse only shook\
its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.\
\
\'91What a pity it wouldn\'92t stay!\'92 sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite\
out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her\
daughter \'91Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose\
YOUR temper!\'92 \'91Hold your tongue, Ma!\'92 said the young Crab, a little\
snappishly. \'91You\'92re enough to try the patience of an oyster!\'92\
\
\'91I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!\'92 said Alice aloud, addressing\
nobody in particular. \'91She\'92d soon fetch it back!\'92\
\
\'91And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?\'92 said the\
Lory.\
\
Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:\
\'91Dinah\'92s our cat. And she\'92s such a capital one for catching mice you\
can\'92t think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,\
she\'92ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!\'92\
\
This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the\
birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very\
carefully, remarking, \'91I really must be getting home; the night-air\
doesn\'92t suit my throat!\'92 and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to\
its children, \'91Come away, my dears! It\'92s high time you were all in bed!\'92\
On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.\
\
\'91I wish I hadn\'92t mentioned Dinah!\'92 she said to herself in a melancholy\
tone. \'91Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I\'92m sure she\'92s the best\
cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you\
any more!\'92 And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very\
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard\
a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up\
eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming\
back to finish his story.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER IV. The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill\
\
It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking\
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard\
it muttering to itself \'91The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh\
my fur and whiskers! She\'92ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are\
ferrets! Where CAN I have dropped them, I wonder?\'92 Alice guessed in a\
moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves,\
and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were\
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in\
the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door,\
had vanished completely.\
\
Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and\
called out to her in an angry tone, \'91Why, Mary Ann, what ARE you doing\
out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!\
Quick, now!\'92 And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once\
in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it\
had made.\
\
\'91He took me for his housemaid,\'92 she said to herself as she ran. \'91How\
surprised he\'92ll be when he finds out who I am! But I\'92d better take him\
his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.\'92 As she said this, she\
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass\
plate with the name \'91W. RABBIT\'92 engraved upon it. She went in without\
knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the\
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the\
fan and gloves.\
\
\'91How queer it seems,\'92 Alice said to herself, \'91to be going messages for\
a rabbit! I suppose Dinah\'92ll be sending me on messages next!\'92 And she\
began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: \'91\'93Miss Alice! Come\
here directly, and get ready for your walk!\'94 \'93Coming in a minute,\
nurse! But I\'92ve got to see that the mouse doesn\'92t get out.\'94 Only I don\'92t\
think,\'92 Alice went on, \'91that they\'92d let Dinah stop in the house if it\
began ordering people about like that!\'92\
\
By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table\
in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs\
of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves,\
and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little\
bottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label this time\
with the words \'91DRINK ME,\'92 but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it\
to her lips. \'91I know SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen,\'92 she said\
to herself, \'91whenever I eat or drink anything; so I\'92ll just see what\
this bottle does. I do hope it\'92ll make me grow large again, for really\
I\'92m quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!\'92\
\
It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had\
drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,\
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put\
down the bottle, saying to herself \'91That\'92s quite enough--I hope I shan\'92t\
grow any more--As it is, I can\'92t get out at the door--I do wish I hadn\'92t\
drunk quite so much!\'92\
\
Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,\
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there\
was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with\
one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.\
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out\
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself \'91Now I\
can do no more, whatever happens. What WILL become of me?\'92\
\
Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,\
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there\
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room\
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.\
\
\'91It was much pleasanter at home,\'92 thought poor Alice, \'91when one wasn\'92t\
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and\
rabbits. I almost wish I hadn\'92t gone down that rabbit-hole--and yet--and\
yet--it\'92s rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what\
CAN have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that\
kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!\
There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And when I\
grow up, I\'92ll write one--but I\'92m grown up now,\'92 she added in a sorrowful\
tone; \'91at least there\'92s no room to grow up any more HERE.\'92\
\
\'91But then,\'92 thought Alice, \'91shall I NEVER get any older than I am\
now? That\'92ll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--but\
then--always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn\'92t like THAT!\'92\
\
\'91Oh, you foolish Alice!\'92 she answered herself. \'91How can you learn\
lessons in here? Why, there\'92s hardly room for YOU, and no room at all\
for any lesson-books!\'92\
\
And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making\
quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard\
a voice outside, and stopped to listen.\
\
\'91Mary Ann! Mary Ann!\'92 said the voice. \'91Fetch me my gloves this moment!\'92\
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was\
the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the\
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large\
as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.\
\
Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as\
the door opened inwards, and Alice\'92s elbow was pressed hard against it,\
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself \'91Then I\'92ll\
go round and get in at the window.\'92\
\
\'91THAT you won\'92t\'92 thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied\
she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her\
hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,\
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,\
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a\
cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.\
\
Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit\'92s--\'91Pat! Pat! Where are you?\'92 And\
then a voice she had never heard before, \'91Sure then I\'92m here! Digging\
for apples, yer honour!\'92\
\
\'91Digging for apples, indeed!\'92 said the Rabbit angrily. \'91Here! Come and\
help me out of THIS!\'92 (Sounds of more broken glass.)\
\
\'91Now tell me, Pat, what\'92s that in the window?\'92\
\
\'91Sure, it\'92s an arm, yer honour!\'92 (He pronounced it \'91arrum.\'92)\
\
\'91An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole\
window!\'92\
\
\'91Sure, it does, yer honour: but it\'92s an arm for all that.\'92\
\
\'91Well, it\'92s got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!\'92\
\
There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers\
now and then; such as, \'91Sure, I don\'92t like it, yer honour, at all, at\
all!\'92 \'91Do as I tell you, you coward!\'92 and at last she spread out her\
hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were\
TWO little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. \'91What a number of\
cucumber-frames there must be!\'92 thought Alice. \'91I wonder what they\'92ll do\
next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD! I\'92m\
sure I don\'92t want to stay in here any longer!\'92\
\
She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a\
rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices\
all talking together: she made out the words: \'91Where\'92s the other\
ladder?--Why, I hadn\'92t to bring but one; Bill\'92s got the other--Bill!\
fetch it here, lad!--Here, put \'91em up at this corner--No, tie \'91em\
together first--they don\'92t reach half high enough yet--Oh! they\'92ll\
do well enough; don\'92t be particular--Here, Bill! catch hold of this\
rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind that loose slate--Oh, it\'92s coming\
down! Heads below!\'92 (a loud crash)--\'91Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I\
fancy--Who\'92s to go down the chimney?--Nay, I shan\'92t! YOU do it!--That I\
won\'92t, then!--Bill\'92s to go down--Here, Bill! the master says you\'92re to\
go down the chimney!\'92\
\
\'91Oh! So Bill\'92s got to come down the chimney, has he?\'92 said Alice to\
herself. \'91Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn\'92t be in\
Bill\'92s place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but\
I THINK I can kick a little!\'92\
\
She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited\
till she heard a little animal (she couldn\'92t guess of what sort it was)\
scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,\
saying to herself \'91This is Bill,\'92 she gave one sharp kick, and waited to\
see what would happen next.\
\
The first thing she heard was a general chorus of \'91There goes Bill!\'92\
then the Rabbit\'92s voice along--\'91Catch him, you by the hedge!\'92 then\
silence, and then another confusion of voices--\'91Hold up his head--Brandy\
now--Don\'92t choke him--How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell\
us all about it!\'92\
\
Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, [\'91That\'92s Bill,\'92 thought\
Alice,) \'91Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I\'92m better now--but I\'92m\
a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know is, something comes at me\
like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!\'92\
\
\'91So you did, old fellow!\'92 said the others.\
\
\'91We must burn the house down!\'92 said the Rabbit\'92s voice; and Alice called\
out as loud as she could, \'91If you do. I\'92ll set Dinah at you!\'92\
\
There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, \'91I\
wonder what they WILL do next! If they had any sense, they\'92d take the\
roof off.\'92 After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and\
Alice heard the Rabbit say, \'91A barrowful will do, to begin with.\'92\
\
\'91A barrowful of WHAT?\'92 thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt,\
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the\
window, and some of them hit her in the face. \'91I\'92ll put a stop to this,\'92\
she said to herself, and shouted out, \'91You\'92d better not do that again!\'92\
which produced another dead silence.\
\
Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into\
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her\
head. \'91If I eat one of these cakes,\'92 she thought, \'91it\'92s sure to make\
SOME change in my size; and as it can\'92t possibly make me larger, it must\
make me smaller, I suppose.\'92\
\
So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she\
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through\
the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little\
animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was\
in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it\
something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she\
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself\
safe in a thick wood.\
\
\'91The first thing I\'92ve got to do,\'92 said Alice to herself, as she wandered\
about in the wood, \'91is to grow to my right size again; and the second\
thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be\
the best plan.\'92\
\
It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply\
arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea\
how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among\
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a\
great hurry.\
\
An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and\
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. \'91Poor little thing!\'92\
said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but\
she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be\
hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of\
all her coaxing.\
\
Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and\
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off\
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,\
and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle,\
to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the\
other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head\
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was\
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every\
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then\
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very\
little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely\
all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with\
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.\
\
This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she\
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and\
till the puppy\'92s bark sounded quite faint in the distance.\
\
\'91And yet what a dear little puppy it was!\'92 said Alice, as she leant\
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the\
leaves: \'91I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if I\'92d\
only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I\'92d nearly forgotten that\
I\'92ve got to grow up again! Let me see--how IS it to be managed? I\
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great\
question is, what?\'92\
\
The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at\
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that\
looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.\
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as\
herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and\
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what\
was on the top of it.\
\
She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the\
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar,\
that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long\
hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER V. Advice from a Caterpillar\
\
The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in silence:\
at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed\
her in a languid, sleepy voice.\
\
\'91Who are YOU?\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied,\
rather shyly, \'91I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--at least I know\
who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been\
changed several times since then.\'92\
\
\'91What do you mean by that?\'92 said the Caterpillar sternly. \'91Explain\
yourself!\'92\
\
\'91I can\'92t explain MYSELF, I\'92m afraid, sir\'92 said Alice, \'91because I\'92m not\
myself, you see.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t see,\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid I can\'92t put it more clearly,\'92 Alice replied very politely,\
\'91for I can\'92t understand it myself to begin with; and being so many\
different sizes in a day is very confusing.\'92\
\
\'91It isn\'92t,\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
\'91Well, perhaps you haven\'92t found it so yet,\'92 said Alice; \'91but when you\
have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you know--and then\
after that into a butterfly, I should think you\'92ll feel it a little\
queer, won\'92t you?\'92\
\
\'91Not a bit,\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
\'91Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,\'92 said Alice; \'91all I know\
is, it would feel very queer to ME.\'92\
\
\'91You!\'92 said the Caterpillar contemptuously. \'91Who are YOU?\'92\
\
Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.\
Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar\'92s making such VERY\
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, \'91I think,\
you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.\'92\
\
\'91Why?\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any\
good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a VERY unpleasant\
state of mind, she turned away.\
\
\'91Come back!\'92 the Caterpillar called after her. \'91I\'92ve something important\
to say!\'92\
\
This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.\
\
\'91Keep your temper,\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
\'91Is that all?\'92 said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she\
could.\
\
\'91No,\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and\
perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For some\
minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its\
arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, \'91So you think\
you\'92re changed, do you?\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid I am, sir,\'92 said Alice; \'91I can\'92t remember things as I\
used--and I don\'92t keep the same size for ten minutes together!\'92\
\
\'91Can\'92t remember WHAT things?\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
\'91Well, I\'92ve tried to say \'93HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE,\'94 but it all came\
different!\'92 Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.\
\
\'91Repeat, \'93YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,\'94\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
Alice folded her hands, and began:--\
\
   \'91You are old, Father William,\'92 the young man said,\
    \'91And your hair has become very white;\
   And yet you incessantly stand on your head--\
    Do you think, at your age, it is right?\'92\
\
   \'91In my youth,\'92 Father William replied to his son,\
    \'91I feared it might injure the brain;\
   But, now that I\'92m perfectly sure I have none,\
    Why, I do it again and again.\'92\
\
   \'91You are old,\'92 said the youth, \'91as I mentioned before,\
    And have grown most uncommonly fat;\
   Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--\
    Pray, what is the reason of that?\'92\
\
   \'91In my youth,\'92 said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,\
    \'91I kept all my limbs very supple\
   By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--\
    Allow me to sell you a couple?\'92\
\
   \'91You are old,\'92 said the youth, \'91and your jaws are too weak\
    For anything tougher than suet;\
   Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak--\
    Pray how did you manage to do it?\'92\
\
   \'91In my youth,\'92 said his father, \'91I took to the law,\
    And argued each case with my wife;\
   And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,\
    Has lasted the rest of my life.\'92\
\
   \'91You are old,\'92 said the youth, \'91one would hardly suppose\
    That your eye was as steady as ever;\
   Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--\
    What made you so awfully clever?\'92\
\
   \'91I have answered three questions, and that is enough,\'92\
    Said his father; \'91don\'92t give yourself airs!\
   Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?\
    Be off, or I\'92ll kick you down stairs!\'92\
\
\
\'91That is not said right,\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
\'91Not QUITE right, I\'92m afraid,\'92 said Alice, timidly; \'91some of the words\
have got altered.\'92\
\
\'91It is wrong from beginning to end,\'92 said the Caterpillar decidedly, and\
there was silence for some minutes.\
\
The Caterpillar was the first to speak.\
\
\'91What size do you want to be?\'92 it asked.\
\
\'91Oh, I\'92m not particular as to size,\'92 Alice hastily replied; \'91only one\
doesn\'92t like changing so often, you know.\'92\
\
\'91I DON\'92T know,\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life\
before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.\
\
\'91Are you content now?\'92 said the Caterpillar.\
\
\'91Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you wouldn\'92t mind,\'92\
said Alice: \'91three inches is such a wretched height to be.\'92\
\
\'91It is a very good height indeed!\'92 said the Caterpillar angrily, rearing\
itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).\
\
\'91But I\'92m not used to it!\'92 pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And\
she thought of herself, \'91I wish the creatures wouldn\'92t be so easily\
offended!\'92\
\
\'91You\'92ll get used to it in time,\'92 said the Caterpillar; and it put the\
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.\
\
This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In\
a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth\
and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the\
mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went,\
\'91One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you\
grow shorter.\'92\
\
\'91One side of WHAT? The other side of WHAT?\'92 thought Alice to herself.\
\
\'91Of the mushroom,\'92 said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it\
aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.\
\
Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying\
to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly\
round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last she\
stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit\
of the edge with each hand.\
\
\'91And now which is which?\'92 she said to herself, and nibbled a little of\
the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent\
blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!\
\
She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt\
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she\
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed\
so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her\
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the\
lefthand bit.\
\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
\'91Come, my head\'92s free at last!\'92 said Alice in a tone of delight, which\
changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders\
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was\
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a\
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.\
\
\'91What CAN all that green stuff be?\'92 said Alice. \'91And where HAVE my\
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can\'92t see you?\'92\
She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,\
except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.\
\
As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she\
tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her\
neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had\
just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going\
to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops\
of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made\
her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and\
was beating her violently with its wings.\
\
\'91Serpent!\'92 screamed the Pigeon.\
\
\'91I\'92m NOT a serpent!\'92 said Alice indignantly. \'91Let me alone!\'92\
\
\'91Serpent, I say again!\'92 repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone,\
and added with a kind of sob, \'91I\'92ve tried every way, and nothing seems\
to suit them!\'92\
\
\'91I haven\'92t the least idea what you\'92re talking about,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91I\'92ve tried the roots of trees, and I\'92ve tried banks, and I\'92ve tried\
hedges,\'92 the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; \'91but those\
serpents! There\'92s no pleasing them!\'92\
\
Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in\
saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.\
\
\'91As if it wasn\'92t trouble enough hatching the eggs,\'92 said the Pigeon;\
\'91but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I\
haven\'92t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m very sorry you\'92ve been annoyed,\'92 said Alice, who was beginning to\
see its meaning.\
\
\'91And just as I\'92d taken the highest tree in the wood,\'92 continued the\
Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, \'91and just as I was thinking I\
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from\
the sky! Ugh, Serpent!\'92\
\
\'91But I\'92m NOT a serpent, I tell you!\'92 said Alice. \'91I\'92m a--I\'92m a--\'92\
\
\'91Well! WHAT are you?\'92 said the Pigeon. \'91I can see you\'92re trying to\
invent something!\'92\
\
\'91I--I\'92m a little girl,\'92 said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered\
the number of changes she had gone through that day.\
\
\'91A likely story indeed!\'92 said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest\
contempt. \'91I\'92ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never ONE\
with such a neck as that! No, no! You\'92re a serpent; and there\'92s no use\
denying it. I suppose you\'92ll be telling me next that you never tasted an\
egg!\'92\
\
\'91I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly,\'92 said Alice, who was a very truthful\
child; \'91but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you\
know.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t believe it,\'92 said the Pigeon; \'91but if they do, why then they\'92re\
a kind of serpent, that\'92s all I can say.\'92\
\
This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a\
minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, \'91You\'92re\
looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and what does it matter to me\
whether you\'92re a little girl or a serpent?\'92\
\
\'91It matters a good deal to ME,\'92 said Alice hastily; \'91but I\'92m not looking\
for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn\'92t want YOURS: I don\'92t\
like them raw.\'92\
\
\'91Well, be off, then!\'92 said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled\
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as\
she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and\
every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she\
remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and\
she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the\
other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had\
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.\
\
It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it\
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,\
and began talking to herself, as usual. \'91Come, there\'92s half my plan done\
now! How puzzling all these changes are! I\'92m never sure what I\'92m going\
to be, from one minute to another! However, I\'92ve got back to my right\
size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how IS that\
to be done, I wonder?\'92 As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open\
place, with a little house in it about four feet high. \'91Whoever lives\
there,\'92 thought Alice, \'91it\'92ll never do to come upon them THIS size: why,\
I should frighten them out of their wits!\'92 So she began nibbling at the\
righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she\
had brought herself down to nine inches high.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER VI. Pig and Pepper\
\
For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what\
to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the\
wood--(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:\
otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a\
fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened\
by another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a\
frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all\
over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about,\
and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.\
\
The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,\
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,\
saying, in a solemn tone, \'91For the Duchess. An invitation from the Queen\
to play croquet.\'92 The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn tone,\
only changing the order of the words a little, \'91From the Queen. An\
invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.\'92\
\
Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.\
\
Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the\
wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the\
Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the\
door, staring stupidly up into the sky.\
\
Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.\
\
\'91There\'92s no sort of use in knocking,\'92 said the Footman, \'91and that for\
two reasons. First, because I\'92m on the same side of the door as you\
are; secondly, because they\'92re making such a noise inside, no one could\
possibly hear you.\'92 And certainly there was a most extraordinary noise\
going on within--a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then\
a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.\
\
\'91Please, then,\'92 said Alice, \'91how am I to get in?\'92\
\
\'91There might be some sense in your knocking,\'92 the Footman went on\
without attending to her, \'91if we had the door between us. For instance,\
if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.\'92\
He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this\
Alice thought decidedly uncivil. \'91But perhaps he can\'92t help it,\'92 she\
said to herself; \'91his eyes are so VERY nearly at the top of his head.\
But at any rate he might answer questions.--How am I to get in?\'92 she\
repeated, aloud.\
\
\'91I shall sit here,\'92 the Footman remarked, \'91till tomorrow--\'92\
\
At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came\
skimming out, straight at the Footman\'92s head: it just grazed his nose,\
and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.\
\
\'91--or next day, maybe,\'92 the Footman continued in the same tone, exactly\
as if nothing had happened.\
\
\'91How am I to get in?\'92 asked Alice again, in a louder tone.\
\
\'91ARE you to get in at all?\'92 said the Footman. \'91That\'92s the first\
question, you know.\'92\
\
It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. \'91It\'92s really\
dreadful,\'92 she muttered to herself, \'91the way all the creatures argue.\
It\'92s enough to drive one crazy!\'92\
\
The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his\
remark, with variations. \'91I shall sit here,\'92 he said, \'91on and off, for\
days and days.\'92\
\
\'91But what am I to do?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Anything you like,\'92 said the Footman, and began whistling.\
\
\'91Oh, there\'92s no use in talking to him,\'92 said Alice desperately: \'91he\'92s\
perfectly idiotic!\'92 And she opened the door and went in.\
\
The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from\
one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in\
the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring\
a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.\
\
\'91There\'92s certainly too much pepper in that soup!\'92 Alice said to herself,\
as well as she could for sneezing.\
\
There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess\
sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling\
alternately without a moment\'92s pause. The only things in the kitchen\
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on\
the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.\
\
\'91Please would you tell me,\'92 said Alice, a little timidly, for she was\
not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, \'91why\
your cat grins like that?\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s a Cheshire cat,\'92 said the Duchess, \'91and that\'92s why. Pig!\'92\
\
She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite\
jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby,\
and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:--\
\
\'91I didn\'92t know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn\'92t know\
that cats COULD grin.\'92\
\
\'91They all can,\'92 said the Duchess; \'91and most of \'91em do.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know of any that do,\'92 Alice said very politely, feeling quite\
pleased to have got into a conversation.\
\
\'91You don\'92t know much,\'92 said the Duchess; \'91and that\'92s a fact.\'92\
\
Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would\
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she\
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the\
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at\
the Duchess and the baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a\
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of\
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,\
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.\
\
\'91Oh, PLEASE mind what you\'92re doing!\'92 cried Alice, jumping up and down in\
an agony of terror. \'91Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS nose\'92; as an unusually\
large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.\
\
\'91If everybody minded their own business,\'92 the Duchess said in a hoarse\
growl, \'91the world would go round a deal faster than it does.\'92\
\
\'91Which would NOT be an advantage,\'92 said Alice, who felt very glad to get\
an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. \'91Just think of\
what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takes\
twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis--\'92\
\
\'91Talking of axes,\'92 said the Duchess, \'91chop off her head!\'92\
\
Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take\
the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to\
be listening, so she went on again: \'91Twenty-four hours, I THINK; or is\
it twelve? I--\'92\
\
\'91Oh, don\'92t bother ME,\'92 said the Duchess; \'91I never could abide figures!\'92\
And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of\
lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of\
every line:\
\
   \'91Speak roughly to your little boy,\
    And beat him when he sneezes:\
   He only does it to annoy,\
    Because he knows it teases.\'92\
\
         CHORUS.\
\
 (In which the cook and the baby joined):--\
\
       \'91Wow! wow! wow!\'92\
\
While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing\
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,\
that Alice could hardly hear the words:--\
\
   \'91I speak severely to my boy,\
    I beat him when he sneezes;\
   For he can thoroughly enjoy\
    The pepper when he pleases!\'92\
\
         CHORUS.\
\
       \'91Wow! wow! wow!\'92\
\
\'91Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!\'92 the Duchess said to Alice,\
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. \'91I must go and get ready to play\
croquet with the Queen,\'92 and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw\
a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.\
\
Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped\
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, \'91just\
like a star-fish,\'92 thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting\
like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and\
straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute\
or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.\
\
As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to\
twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right\
ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried\
it out into the open air. \'91IF I don\'92t take this child away with me,\'92\
thought Alice, \'91they\'92re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn\'92t it be\
murder to leave it behind?\'92 She said the last words out loud, and the\
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).\
\'91Don\'92t grunt,\'92 said Alice; \'91that\'92s not at all a proper way of expressing\
yourself.\'92\
\
The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to\
see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had\
a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its\
eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did not\
like the look of the thing at all. \'91But perhaps it was only sobbing,\'92\
she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any\
tears.\
\
No, there were no tears. \'91If you\'92re going to turn into a pig, my dear,\'92\
said Alice, seriously, \'91I\'92ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind\
now!\'92 The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible\
to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.\
\
Alice was just beginning to think to herself, \'91Now, what am I to do with\
this creature when I get it home?\'92 when it grunted again, so violently,\
that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there could\
be NO mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she\
felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.\
\
So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see\
it trot away quietly into the wood. \'91If it had grown up,\'92 she said\
to herself, \'91it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes\
rather a handsome pig, I think.\'92 And she began thinking over other\
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying\
to herself, \'91if one only knew the right way to change them--\'92 when she\
was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a\
tree a few yards off.\
\
The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she\
thought: still it had VERY long claws and a great many teeth, so she\
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.\
\
\'91Cheshire Puss,\'92 she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know\
whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.\
\'91Come, it\'92s pleased so far,\'92 thought Alice, and she went on. \'91Would you\
tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?\'92\
\
\'91That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,\'92 said the Cat.\
\
\'91I don\'92t much care where--\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Then it doesn\'92t matter which way you go,\'92 said the Cat.\
\
\'91--so long as I get SOMEWHERE,\'92 Alice added as an explanation.\
\
\'91Oh, you\'92re sure to do that,\'92 said the Cat, \'91if you only walk long\
enough.\'92\
\
Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question.\
\'91What sort of people live about here?\'92\
\
\'91In THAT direction,\'92 the Cat said, waving its right paw round, \'91lives\
a Hatter: and in THAT direction,\'92 waving the other paw, \'91lives a March\
Hare. Visit either you like: they\'92re both mad.\'92\
\
\'91But I don\'92t want to go among mad people,\'92 Alice remarked.\
\
\'91Oh, you can\'92t help that,\'92 said the Cat: \'91we\'92re all mad here. I\'92m mad.\
You\'92re mad.\'92\
\
\'91How do you know I\'92m mad?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91You must be,\'92 said the Cat, \'91or you wouldn\'92t have come here.\'92\
\
Alice didn\'92t think that proved it at all; however, she went on \'91And how\
do you know that you\'92re mad?\'92\
\
\'91To begin with,\'92 said the Cat, \'91a dog\'92s not mad. You grant that?\'92\
\
\'91I suppose so,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Well, then,\'92 the Cat went on, \'91you see, a dog growls when it\'92s angry,\
and wags its tail when it\'92s pleased. Now I growl when I\'92m pleased, and\
wag my tail when I\'92m angry. Therefore I\'92m mad.\'92\
\
\'91I call it purring, not growling,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Call it what you like,\'92 said the Cat. \'91Do you play croquet with the\
Queen to-day?\'92\
\
\'91I should like it very much,\'92 said Alice, \'91but I haven\'92t been invited\
yet.\'92\
\
\'91You\'92ll see me there,\'92 said the Cat, and vanished.\
\
Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer\
things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been,\
it suddenly appeared again.\
\
\'91By-the-bye, what became of the baby?\'92 said the Cat. \'91I\'92d nearly\
forgotten to ask.\'92\
\
\'91It turned into a pig,\'92 Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back\
in a natural way.\
\
\'91I thought it would,\'92 said the Cat, and vanished again.\
\
Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not\
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in\
which the March Hare was said to live. \'91I\'92ve seen hatters before,\'92 she\
said to herself; \'91the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and\
perhaps as this is May it won\'92t be raving mad--at least not so mad as\
it was in March.\'92 As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat\
again, sitting on a branch of a tree.\
\
\'91Did you say pig, or fig?\'92 said the Cat.\
\
\'91I said pig,\'92 replied Alice; \'91and I wish you wouldn\'92t keep appearing and\
vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.\'92\
\
\'91All right,\'92 said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,\
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which\
remained some time after the rest of it had gone.\
\
\'91Well! I\'92ve often seen a cat without a grin,\'92 thought Alice; \'91but a grin\
without a cat! It\'92s the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!\'92\
\
She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house\
of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the\
chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It\
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had\
nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to\
about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly,\
saying to herself \'91Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost\
wish I\'92d gone to see the Hatter instead!\'92\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER VII. A Mad Tea-Party\
\
There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the\
March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting\
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a\
cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. \'91Very\
uncomfortable for the Dormouse,\'92 thought Alice; \'91only, as it\'92s asleep, I\
suppose it doesn\'92t mind.\'92\
\
The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at\
one corner of it: \'91No room! No room!\'92 they cried out when they saw Alice\
coming. \'91There\'92s PLENTY of room!\'92 said Alice indignantly, and she sat\
down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.\
\
\'91Have some wine,\'92 the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.\
\
Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.\
\'91I don\'92t see any wine,\'92 she remarked.\
\
\'91There isn\'92t any,\'92 said the March Hare.\
\
\'91Then it wasn\'92t very civil of you to offer it,\'92 said Alice angrily.\
\
\'91It wasn\'92t very civil of you to sit down without being invited,\'92 said\
the March Hare.\
\
\'91I didn\'92t know it was YOUR table,\'92 said Alice; \'91it\'92s laid for a great\
many more than three.\'92\
\
\'91Your hair wants cutting,\'92 said the Hatter. He had been looking at Alice\
for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.\
\
\'91You should learn not to make personal remarks,\'92 Alice said with some\
severity; \'91it\'92s very rude.\'92\
\
The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he SAID\
was, \'91Why is a raven like a writing-desk?\'92\
\
\'91Come, we shall have some fun now!\'92 thought Alice. \'91I\'92m glad they\'92ve\
begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,\'92 she added aloud.\
\
\'91Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?\'92 said the\
March Hare.\
\
\'91Exactly so,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Then you should say what you mean,\'92 the March Hare went on.\
\
\'91I do,\'92 Alice hastily replied; \'91at least--at least I mean what I\
say--that\'92s the same thing, you know.\'92\
\
\'91Not the same thing a bit!\'92 said the Hatter. \'91You might just as well say\
that \'93I see what I eat\'94 is the same thing as \'93I eat what I see\'94!\'92\
\
\'91You might just as well say,\'92 added the March Hare, \'91that \'93I like what I\
get\'94 is the same thing as \'93I get what I like\'94!\'92\
\
\'91You might just as well say,\'92 added the Dormouse, who seemed to be\
talking in his sleep, \'91that \'93I breathe when I sleep\'94 is the same thing\
as \'93I sleep when I breathe\'94!\'92\
\
\'91It IS the same thing with you,\'92 said the Hatter, and here the\
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice\
thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks,\
which wasn\'92t much.\
\
The Hatter was the first to break the silence. \'91What day of the month\
is it?\'92 he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his\
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,\
and holding it to his ear.\
\
Alice considered a little, and then said \'91The fourth.\'92\
\
\'91Two days wrong!\'92 sighed the Hatter. \'91I told you butter wouldn\'92t suit\
the works!\'92 he added looking angrily at the March Hare.\
\
\'91It was the BEST butter,\'92 the March Hare meekly replied.\
\
\'91Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,\'92 the Hatter grumbled:\
\'91you shouldn\'92t have put it in with the bread-knife.\'92\
\
The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped\
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of\
nothing better to say than his first remark, \'91It was the BEST butter,\
you know.\'92\
\
Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. \'91What a\
funny watch!\'92 she remarked. \'91It tells the day of the month, and doesn\'92t\
tell what o\'92clock it is!\'92\
\
\'91Why should it?\'92 muttered the Hatter. \'91Does YOUR watch tell you what\
year it is?\'92\
\
\'91Of course not,\'92 Alice replied very readily: \'91but that\'92s because it\
stays the same year for such a long time together.\'92\
\
\'91Which is just the case with MINE,\'92 said the Hatter.\
\
Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter\'92s remark seemed to have no\
sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. \'91I don\'92t quite\
understand you,\'92 she said, as politely as she could.\
\
\'91The Dormouse is asleep again,\'92 said the Hatter, and he poured a little\
hot tea upon its nose.\
\
The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its\
eyes, \'91Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.\'92\
\
\'91Have you guessed the riddle yet?\'92 the Hatter said, turning to Alice\
again.\
\
\'91No, I give it up,\'92 Alice replied: \'91what\'92s the answer?\'92\
\
\'91I haven\'92t the slightest idea,\'92 said the Hatter.\
\
\'91Nor I,\'92 said the March Hare.\
\
Alice sighed wearily. \'91I think you might do something better with the\
time,\'92 she said, \'91than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.\'92\
\
\'91If you knew Time as well as I do,\'92 said the Hatter, \'91you wouldn\'92t talk\
about wasting IT. It\'92s HIM.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know what you mean,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Of course you don\'92t!\'92 the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously.\
\'91I dare say you never even spoke to Time!\'92\
\
\'91Perhaps not,\'92 Alice cautiously replied: \'91but I know I have to beat time\
when I learn music.\'92\
\
\'91Ah! that accounts for it,\'92 said the Hatter. \'91He won\'92t stand beating.\
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he\'92d do almost anything\
you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o\'92clock in\
the morning, just time to begin lessons: you\'92d only have to whisper a\
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,\
time for dinner!\'92\
\
[\'91I only wish it was,\'92 the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)\
\
\'91That would be grand, certainly,\'92 said Alice thoughtfully: \'91but then--I\
shouldn\'92t be hungry for it, you know.\'92\
\
\'91Not at first, perhaps,\'92 said the Hatter: \'91but you could keep it to\
half-past one as long as you liked.\'92\
\
\'91Is that the way YOU manage?\'92 Alice asked.\
\
The Hatter shook his head mournfully. \'91Not I!\'92 he replied. \'91We\
quarrelled last March--just before HE went mad, you know--\'92 (pointing\
with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) \'91--it was at the great concert\
given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing\
\
     \'93Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!\
     How I wonder what you\'92re at!\'94\
\
You know the song, perhaps?\'92\
\
\'91I\'92ve heard something like it,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91It goes on, you know,\'92 the Hatter continued, \'91in this way:--\
\
     \'93Up above the world you fly,\
     Like a tea-tray in the sky.\
         Twinkle, twinkle--\'93\'92\
\
Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep \'91Twinkle,\
twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--\'92 and went on so long that they had to pinch\
it to make it stop.\
\
\'91Well, I\'92d hardly finished the first verse,\'92 said the Hatter, \'91when the\
Queen jumped up and bawled out, \'93He\'92s murdering the time! Off with his\
head!\'94\'92\
\
\'91How dreadfully savage!\'92 exclaimed Alice.\
\
\'91And ever since that,\'92 the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, \'91he won\'92t\
do a thing I ask! It\'92s always six o\'92clock now.\'92\
\
A bright idea came into Alice\'92s head. \'91Is that the reason so many\
tea-things are put out here?\'92 she asked.\
\
\'91Yes, that\'92s it,\'92 said the Hatter with a sigh: \'91it\'92s always tea-time,\
and we\'92ve no time to wash the things between whiles.\'92\
\
\'91Then you keep moving round, I suppose?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Exactly so,\'92 said the Hatter: \'91as the things get used up.\'92\
\
\'91But what happens when you come to the beginning again?\'92 Alice ventured\
to ask.\
\
\'91Suppose we change the subject,\'92 the March Hare interrupted, yawning.\
\'91I\'92m getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid I don\'92t know one,\'92 said Alice, rather alarmed at the\
proposal.\
\
\'91Then the Dormouse shall!\'92 they both cried. \'91Wake up, Dormouse!\'92 And\
they pinched it on both sides at once.\
\
The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. \'91I wasn\'92t asleep,\'92 he said in a\
hoarse, feeble voice: \'91I heard every word you fellows were saying.\'92\
\
\'91Tell us a story!\'92 said the March Hare.\
\
\'91Yes, please do!\'92 pleaded Alice.\
\
\'91And be quick about it,\'92 added the Hatter, \'91or you\'92ll be asleep again\
before it\'92s done.\'92\
\
\'91Once upon a time there were three little sisters,\'92 the Dormouse began\
in a great hurry; \'91and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and\
they lived at the bottom of a well--\'92\
\
\'91What did they live on?\'92 said Alice, who always took a great interest in\
questions of eating and drinking.\
\
\'91They lived on treacle,\'92 said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or\
two.\
\
\'91They couldn\'92t have done that, you know,\'92 Alice gently remarked; \'91they\'92d\
have been ill.\'92\
\
\'91So they were,\'92 said the Dormouse; \'91VERY ill.\'92\
\
Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of\
living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: \'91But\
why did they live at the bottom of a well?\'92\
\
\'91Take some more tea,\'92 the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.\
\
\'91I\'92ve had nothing yet,\'92 Alice replied in an offended tone, \'91so I can\'92t\
take more.\'92\
\
\'91You mean you can\'92t take LESS,\'92 said the Hatter: \'91it\'92s very easy to take\
MORE than nothing.\'92\
\
\'91Nobody asked YOUR opinion,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Who\'92s making personal remarks now?\'92 the Hatter asked triumphantly.\
\
Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself\
to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and\
repeated her question. \'91Why did they live at the bottom of a well?\'92\
\
The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then\
said, \'91It was a treacle-well.\'92\
\
\'91There\'92s no such thing!\'92 Alice was beginning very angrily, but the\
Hatter and the March Hare went \'91Sh! sh!\'92 and the Dormouse sulkily\
remarked, \'91If you can\'92t be civil, you\'92d better finish the story for\
yourself.\'92\
\
\'91No, please go on!\'92 Alice said very humbly; \'91I won\'92t interrupt again. I\
dare say there may be ONE.\'92\
\
\'91One, indeed!\'92 said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to\
go on. \'91And so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw,\
you know--\'92\
\
\'91What did they draw?\'92 said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.\
\
\'91Treacle,\'92 said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.\
\
\'91I want a clean cup,\'92 interrupted the Hatter: \'91let\'92s all move one place\
on.\'92\
\
He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare\
moved into the Dormouse\'92s place, and Alice rather unwillingly took\
the place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any\
advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than\
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.\
\
Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very\
cautiously: \'91But I don\'92t understand. Where did they draw the treacle\
from?\'92\
\
\'91You can draw water out of a water-well,\'92 said the Hatter; \'91so I should\
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stupid?\'92\
\
\'91But they were IN the well,\'92 Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing to\
notice this last remark.\
\
\'91Of course they were\'92, said the Dormouse; \'91--well in.\'92\
\
This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for\
some time without interrupting it.\
\
\'91They were learning to draw,\'92 the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing\
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; \'91and they drew all manner of\
things--everything that begins with an M--\'92\
\
\'91Why with an M?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Why not?\'92 said the March Hare.\
\
Alice was silent.\
\
The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into\
a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with\
a little shriek, and went on: \'91--that begins with an M, such as\
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say\
things are \'93much of a muchness\'94--did you ever see such a thing as a\
drawing of a muchness?\'92\
\
\'91Really, now you ask me,\'92 said Alice, very much confused, \'91I don\'92t\
think--\'92\
\
\'91Then you shouldn\'92t talk,\'92 said the Hatter.\
\
This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in\
great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and\
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she\
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:\
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into\
the teapot.\
\
\'91At any rate I\'92ll never go THERE again!\'92 said Alice as she picked her\
way through the wood. \'91It\'92s the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all\
my life!\'92\
\
Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door\
leading right into it. \'91That\'92s very curious!\'92 she thought. \'91But\
everything\'92s curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.\'92 And in\
she went.\
\
Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little\
glass table. \'91Now, I\'92ll manage better this time,\'92 she said to herself,\
and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that\
led into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she\
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:\
then she walked down the little passage: and THEN--she found herself at\
last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool\
fountains.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER VIII. The Queen\'92s Croquet-Ground\
\
A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses\
growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily\
painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went\
nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of\
them say, \'91Look out now, Five! Don\'92t go splashing paint over me like\
that!\'92\
\
\'91I couldn\'92t help it,\'92 said Five, in a sulky tone; \'91Seven jogged my\
elbow.\'92\
\
On which Seven looked up and said, \'91That\'92s right, Five! Always lay the\
blame on others!\'92\
\
\'91YOU\'92D better not talk!\'92 said Five. \'91I heard the Queen say only\
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!\'92\
\
\'91What for?\'92 said the one who had spoken first.\
\
\'91That\'92s none of YOUR business, Two!\'92 said Seven.\
\
\'91Yes, it IS his business!\'92 said Five, \'91and I\'92ll tell him--it was for\
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.\'92\
\
Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun \'91Well, of all the unjust\
things--\'92 when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching\
them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and\
all of them bowed low.\
\
\'91Would you tell me,\'92 said Alice, a little timidly, \'91why you are painting\
those roses?\'92\
\
Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low\
voice, \'91Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a\
RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen\
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.\
So you see, Miss, we\'92re doing our best, afore she comes, to--\'92 At this\
moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called\
out \'91The Queen! The Queen!\'92 and the three gardeners instantly threw\
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,\
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.\
\
First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like\
the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the\
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with\
diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came\
the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came\
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented\
with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among\
them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried\
nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without\
noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King\'92s\
crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand\
procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.\
\
Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face\
like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard\
of such a rule at processions; \'91and besides, what would be the use of\
a procession,\'92 thought she, \'91if people had all to lie down upon their\
faces, so that they couldn\'92t see it?\'92 So she stood still where she was,\
and waited.\
\
When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked\
at her, and the Queen said severely \'91Who is this?\'92 She said it to the\
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.\
\
\'91Idiot!\'92 said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to\
Alice, she went on, \'91What\'92s your name, child?\'92\
\
\'91My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,\'92 said Alice very politely;\
but she added, to herself, \'91Why, they\'92re only a pack of cards, after\
all. I needn\'92t be afraid of them!\'92\
\
\'91And who are THESE?\'92 said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who\
were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their\
faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the\
pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or\
courtiers, or three of her own children.\
\
\'91How should I know?\'92 said Alice, surprised at her own courage. \'91It\'92s no\
business of MINE.\'92\
\
The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a\
moment like a wild beast, screamed \'91Off with her head! Off--\'92\
\
\'91Nonsense!\'92 said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was\
silent.\
\
The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said \'91Consider, my\
dear: she is only a child!\'92\
\
The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave \'91Turn them\
over!\'92\
\
The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.\
\
\'91Get up!\'92 said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three\
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,\
the royal children, and everybody else.\
\
\'91Leave off that!\'92 screamed the Queen. \'91You make me giddy.\'92 And then,\
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, \'91What HAVE you been doing here?\'92\
\
\'91May it please your Majesty,\'92 said Two, in a very humble tone, going\
down on one knee as he spoke, \'91we were trying--\'92\
\
\'91I see!\'92 said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.\
\'91Off with their heads!\'92 and the procession moved on, three of the\
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran\
to Alice for protection.\
\
\'91You shan\'92t be beheaded!\'92 said Alice, and she put them into a large\
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a\
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the\
others.\
\
\'91Are their heads off?\'92 shouted the Queen.\
\
\'91Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!\'92 the soldiers shouted\
in reply.\
\
\'91That\'92s right!\'92 shouted the Queen. \'91Can you play croquet?\'92\
\
The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was\
evidently meant for her.\
\
\'91Yes!\'92 shouted Alice.\
\
\'91Come on, then!\'92 roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession,\
wondering very much what would happen next.\
\
\'91It\'92s--it\'92s a very fine day!\'92 said a timid voice at her side. She was\
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.\
\
\'91Very,\'92 said Alice: \'91--where\'92s the Duchess?\'92\
\
\'91Hush! Hush!\'92 said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked\
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon\
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered \'91She\'92s under\
sentence of execution.\'92\
\
\'91What for?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Did you say \'93What a pity!\'94?\'92 the Rabbit asked.\
\
\'91No, I didn\'92t,\'92 said Alice: \'91I don\'92t think it\'92s at all a pity. I said\
\'93What for?\'94\'92\
\
\'91She boxed the Queen\'92s ears--\'92 the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little\
scream of laughter. \'91Oh, hush!\'92 the Rabbit whispered in a frightened\
tone. \'91The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the\
Queen said--\'92\
\
\'91Get to your places!\'92 shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and\
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each\
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game\
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in\
her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs,\
the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves\
up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.\
\
The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:\
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under\
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got\
its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a\
blow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face,\
with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out\
laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin\
again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled\
itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was\
generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the\
hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up\
and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the\
conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.\
\
The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling\
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short\
time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and\
shouting \'91Off with his head!\'92 or \'91Off with her head!\'92 about once in a\
minute.\
\
Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any\
dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,\
\'91and then,\'92 thought she, \'91what would become of me? They\'92re dreadfully\
fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there\'92s any one\
left alive!\'92\
\
She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she\
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance\
in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it\
a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself\
\'91It\'92s the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.\'92\
\
\'91How are you getting on?\'92 said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth\
enough for it to speak with.\
\
Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. \'91It\'92s no use\
speaking to it,\'92 she thought, \'91till its ears have come, or at least one\
of them.\'92 In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put\
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad\
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was\
enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.\
\
\'91I don\'92t think they play at all fairly,\'92 Alice began, in rather a\
complaining tone, \'91and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can\'92t hear\
oneself speak--and they don\'92t seem to have any rules in particular;\
at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and you\'92ve no idea how\
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there\'92s the\
arch I\'92ve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the\
ground--and I should have croqueted the Queen\'92s hedgehog just now, only\
it ran away when it saw mine coming!\'92\
\
\'91How do you like the Queen?\'92 said the Cat in a low voice.\
\
\'91Not at all,\'92 said Alice: \'91she\'92s so extremely--\'92 Just then she noticed\
that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,\
\'91--likely to win, that it\'92s hardly worth while finishing the game.\'92\
\
The Queen smiled and passed on.\
\
\'91Who ARE you talking to?\'92 said the King, going up to Alice, and looking\
at the Cat\'92s head with great curiosity.\
\
\'91It\'92s a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,\'92 said Alice: \'91allow me to\
introduce it.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t like the look of it at all,\'92 said the King: \'91however, it may\
kiss my hand if it likes.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92d rather not,\'92 the Cat remarked.\
\
\'91Don\'92t be impertinent,\'92 said the King, \'91and don\'92t look at me like that!\'92\
He got behind Alice as he spoke.\
\
\'91A cat may look at a king,\'92 said Alice. \'91I\'92ve read that in some book,\
but I don\'92t remember where.\'92\
\
\'91Well, it must be removed,\'92 said the King very decidedly, and he called\
the Queen, who was passing at the moment, \'91My dear! I wish you would\
have this cat removed!\'92\
\
The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.\
\'91Off with his head!\'92 she said, without even looking round.\
\
\'91I\'92ll fetch the executioner myself,\'92 said the King eagerly, and he\
hurried off.\
\
Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going\
on, as she heard the Queen\'92s voice in the distance, screaming with\
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be\
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look\
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew\
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.\
\
The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed\
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the\
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the\
other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless\
sort of way to fly up into a tree.\
\
By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight\
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: \'91but it doesn\'92t\
matter much,\'92 thought Alice, \'91as all the arches are gone from this side\
of the ground.\'92 So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not\
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her\
friend.\
\
When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a\
large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between\
the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,\
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.\
\
The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle\
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they\
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly\
what they said.\
\
The executioner\'92s argument was, that you couldn\'92t cut off a head unless\
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a\
thing before, and he wasn\'92t going to begin at HIS time of life.\
\
The King\'92s argument was, that anything that had a head could be\
beheaded, and that you weren\'92t to talk nonsense.\
\
The Queen\'92s argument was, that if something wasn\'92t done about it in less\
than no time she\'92d have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last\
remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)\
\
Alice could think of nothing else to say but \'91It belongs to the Duchess:\
you\'92d better ask HER about it.\'92\
\
\'91She\'92s in prison,\'92 the Queen said to the executioner: \'91fetch her here.\'92\
And the executioner went off like an arrow.\
\
 The Cat\'92s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,\
by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely\
disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down\
looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle\'92s Story\
\
\'91You can\'92t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!\'92\
said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice\'92s, and\
they walked off together.\
\
Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought\
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so\
savage when they met in the kitchen.\
\
\'91When I\'92M a Duchess,\'92 she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone\
though), \'91I won\'92t have any pepper in my kitchen AT ALL. Soup does very\
well without--Maybe it\'92s always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,\'92\
she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of\
rule, \'91and vinegar that makes them sour--and camomile that makes\
them bitter--and--and barley-sugar and such things that make children\
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldn\'92t be so\
stingy about it, you know--\'92\
\
She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little\
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. \'91You\'92re thinking\
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can\'92t\
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in\
a bit.\'92\
\
\'91Perhaps it hasn\'92t one,\'92 Alice ventured to remark.\
\
\'91Tut, tut, child!\'92 said the Duchess. \'91Everything\'92s got a moral, if only\
you can find it.\'92 And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice\'92s side as\
she spoke.\
\
Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the\
Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the\
right height to rest her chin upon Alice\'92s shoulder, and it was an\
uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she\
bore it as well as she could.\
\
\'91The game\'92s going on rather better now,\'92 she said, by way of keeping up\
the conversation a little.\
\
\'91\'92Tis so,\'92 said the Duchess: \'91and the moral of that is--\'93Oh, \'91tis love,\
\'91tis love, that makes the world go round!\'94\'92\
\
\'91Somebody said,\'92 Alice whispered, \'91that it\'92s done by everybody minding\
their own business!\'92\
\
\'91Ah, well! It means much the same thing,\'92 said the Duchess, digging her\
sharp little chin into Alice\'92s shoulder as she added, \'91and the moral\
of THAT is--\'93Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of\
themselves.\'94\'92\
\
\'91How fond she is of finding morals in things!\'92 Alice thought to herself.\
\
\'91I dare say you\'92re wondering why I don\'92t put my arm round your waist,\'92\
the Duchess said after a pause: \'91the reason is, that I\'92m doubtful about\
the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?\'92\
\
\'91HE might bite,\'92 Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to\
have the experiment tried.\
\
\'91Very true,\'92 said the Duchess: \'91flamingoes and mustard both bite. And\
the moral of that is--\'93Birds of a feather flock together.\'94\'92\
\
\'91Only mustard isn\'92t a bird,\'92 Alice remarked.\
\
\'91Right, as usual,\'92 said the Duchess: \'91what a clear way you have of\
putting things!\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s a mineral, I THINK,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Of course it is,\'92 said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to\
everything that Alice said; \'91there\'92s a large mustard-mine near here. And\
the moral of that is--\'93The more there is of mine, the less there is of\
yours.\'94\'92\
\
\'91Oh, I know!\'92 exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark,\
\'91it\'92s a vegetable. It doesn\'92t look like one, but it is.\'92\
\
\'91I quite agree with you,\'92 said the Duchess; \'91and the moral of that\
is--\'93Be what you would seem to be\'94--or if you\'92d like it put more\
simply--\'93Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might\
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise\
than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.\'94\'92\
\
\'91I think I should understand that better,\'92 Alice said very politely, \'91if\
I had it written down: but I can\'92t quite follow it as you say it.\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s nothing to what I could say if I chose,\'92 the Duchess replied, in\
a pleased tone.\
\
\'91Pray don\'92t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,\'92 said\
Alice.\
\
\'91Oh, don\'92t talk about trouble!\'92 said the Duchess. \'91I make you a present\
of everything I\'92ve said as yet.\'92\
\
\'91A cheap sort of present!\'92 thought Alice. \'91I\'92m glad they don\'92t give\
birthday presents like that!\'92 But she did not venture to say it out\
loud.\
\
\'91Thinking again?\'92 the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp\
little chin.\
\
\'91I\'92ve a right to think,\'92 said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to\
feel a little worried.\
\
\'91Just about as much right,\'92 said the Duchess, \'91as pigs have to fly; and\
the m--\'92\
\
But here, to Alice\'92s great surprise, the Duchess\'92s voice died away, even\
in the middle of her favourite word \'91moral,\'92 and the arm that was linked\
into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen\
in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.\
\
\'91A fine day, your Majesty!\'92 the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.\
\
\'91Now, I give you fair warning,\'92 shouted the Queen, stamping on the\
ground as she spoke; \'91either you or your head must be off, and that in\
about half no time! Take your choice!\'92\
\
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.\
\
\'91Let\'92s go on with the game,\'92 the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was\
too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the\
croquet-ground.\
\
The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen\'92s absence, and were\
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried\
back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment\'92s delay would\
cost them their lives.\
\
All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with\
the other players, and shouting \'91Off with his head!\'92 or \'91Off with her\
head!\'92 Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers,\
who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by\
the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the\
players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and\
under sentence of execution.\
\
Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, \'91Have\
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?\'92\
\
\'91No,\'92 said Alice. \'91I don\'92t even know what a Mock Turtle is.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,\'92 said the Queen.\
\
\'91I never saw one, or heard of one,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Come on, then,\'92 said the Queen, \'91and he shall tell you his history,\'92\
\
As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice,\
to the company generally, \'91You are all pardoned.\'92 \'91Come, THAT\'92S a good\
thing!\'92 she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the\
number of executions the Queen had ordered.\
\
They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun.\
(IF you don\'92t know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) \'91Up, lazy\
thing!\'92 said the Queen, \'91and take this young lady to see the Mock\
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some\
executions I have ordered\'92; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with\
the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on\
the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go\
after that savage Queen: so she waited.\
\
The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till\
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. \'91What fun!\'92 said the Gryphon,\
half to itself, half to Alice.\
\
\'91What IS the fun?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Why, SHE,\'92 said the Gryphon. \'91It\'92s all her fancy, that: they never\
executes nobody, you know. Come on!\'92\
\
\'91Everybody says \'93come on!\'94 here,\'92 thought Alice, as she went slowly\
after it: \'91I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!\'92\
\
They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,\
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came\
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She\
pitied him deeply. \'91What is his sorrow?\'92 she asked the Gryphon, and the\
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, \'91It\'92s all his\
fancy, that: he hasn\'92t got no sorrow, you know. Come on!\'92\
\
So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes\
full of tears, but said nothing.\
\
\'91This here young lady,\'92 said the Gryphon, \'91she wants for to know your\
history, she do.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92ll tell it her,\'92 said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: \'91sit\
down, both of you, and don\'92t speak a word till I\'92ve finished.\'92\
\
So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to\
herself, \'91I don\'92t see how he can EVEN finish, if he doesn\'92t begin.\'92 But\
she waited patiently.\
\
\'91Once,\'92 said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, \'91I was a real\
Turtle.\'92\
\
These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an\
occasional exclamation of \'91Hjckrrh!\'92 from the Gryphon, and the constant\
heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and\
saying, \'91Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,\'92 but she could\
not help thinking there MUST be more to come, so she sat still and said\
nothing.\
\
\'91When we were little,\'92 the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,\
though still sobbing a little now and then, \'91we went to school in the\
sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise--\'92\
\
\'91Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn\'92t one?\'92 Alice asked.\
\
\'91We called him Tortoise because he taught us,\'92 said the Mock Turtle\
angrily: \'91really you are very dull!\'92\
\
\'91You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,\'92\
added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor\
Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said\
to the Mock Turtle, \'91Drive on, old fellow! Don\'92t be all day about it!\'92\
and he went on in these words:\
\
\'91Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn\'92t believe it--\'92\
\
\'91I never said I didn\'92t!\'92 interrupted Alice.\
\
\'91You did,\'92 said the Mock Turtle.\
\
\'91Hold your tongue!\'92 added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.\
The Mock Turtle went on.\
\
\'91We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day--\'92\
\
\'91I\'92VE been to a day-school, too,\'92 said Alice; \'91you needn\'92t be so proud\
as all that.\'92\
\
\'91With extras?\'92 asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Alice, \'91we learned French and music.\'92\
\
\'91And washing?\'92 said the Mock Turtle.\
\
\'91Certainly not!\'92 said Alice indignantly.\
\
\'91Ah! then yours wasn\'92t a really good school,\'92 said the Mock Turtle in\
a tone of great relief. \'91Now at OURS they had at the end of the bill,\
\'93French, music, AND WASHING--extra.\'94\'92\
\
\'91You couldn\'92t have wanted it much,\'92 said Alice; \'91living at the bottom of\
the sea.\'92\
\
\'91I couldn\'92t afford to learn it.\'92 said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. \'91I\
only took the regular course.\'92\
\
\'91What was that?\'92 inquired Alice.\
\
\'91Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,\'92 the Mock Turtle\
replied; \'91and then the different branches of Arithmetic--Ambition,\
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.\'92\
\
\'91I never heard of \'93Uglification,\'94\'92 Alice ventured to say. \'91What is it?\'92\
\
The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. \'91What! Never heard of\
uglifying!\'92 it exclaimed. \'91You know what to beautify is, I suppose?\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Alice doubtfully: \'91it means--to--make--anything--prettier.\'92\
\
\'91Well, then,\'92 the Gryphon went on, \'91if you don\'92t know what to uglify is,\
you ARE a simpleton.\'92\
\
Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she\
turned to the Mock Turtle, and said \'91What else had you to learn?\'92\
\
\'91Well, there was Mystery,\'92 the Mock Turtle replied, counting off\
the subjects on his flappers, \'91--Mystery, ancient and modern, with\
Seaography: then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,\
that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawling, Stretching, and\
Fainting in Coils.\'92\
\
\'91What was THAT like?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Well, I can\'92t show it you myself,\'92 the Mock Turtle said: \'91I\'92m too\
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.\'92\
\
\'91Hadn\'92t time,\'92 said the Gryphon: \'91I went to the Classics master, though.\
He was an old crab, HE was.\'92\
\
\'91I never went to him,\'92 the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: \'91he taught\
Laughing and Grief, they used to say.\'92\
\
\'91So he did, so he did,\'92 said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both\
creatures hid their faces in their paws.\
\
\'91And how many hours a day did you do lessons?\'92 said Alice, in a hurry to\
change the subject.\
\
\'91Ten hours the first day,\'92 said the Mock Turtle: \'91nine the next, and so\
on.\'92\
\
\'91What a curious plan!\'92 exclaimed Alice.\
\
\'91That\'92s the reason they\'92re called lessons,\'92 the Gryphon remarked:\
\'91because they lessen from day to day.\'92\
\
This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little\
before she made her next remark. \'91Then the eleventh day must have been a\
holiday?\'92\
\
\'91Of course it was,\'92 said the Mock Turtle.\
\
\'91And how did you manage on the twelfth?\'92 Alice went on eagerly.\
\
\'91That\'92s enough about lessons,\'92 the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided\
tone: \'91tell her something about the games now.\'92\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER X. The Lobster Quadrille\
\
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across\
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or\
two sobs choked his voice. \'91Same as if he had a bone in his throat,\'92\
said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in\
the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears\
running down his cheeks, he went on again:--\
\
\'91You may not have lived much under the sea--\'92 [\'91I haven\'92t,\'92 said\
Alice)--\'91and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--\'92\
(Alice began to say \'91I once tasted--\'92 but checked herself hastily, and\
said \'91No, never\'92) \'91--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a\
Lobster Quadrille is!\'92\
\
\'91No, indeed,\'92 said Alice. \'91What sort of a dance is it?\'92\
\
\'91Why,\'92 said the Gryphon, \'91you first form into a line along the\
sea-shore--\'92\
\
\'91Two lines!\'92 cried the Mock Turtle. \'91Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;\
then, when you\'92ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--\'92\
\
\'91THAT generally takes some time,\'92 interrupted the Gryphon.\
\
\'91--you advance twice--\'92\
\
\'91Each with a lobster as a partner!\'92 cried the Gryphon.\
\
\'91Of course,\'92 the Mock Turtle said: \'91advance twice, set to partners--\'92\
\
\'91--change lobsters, and retire in same order,\'92 continued the Gryphon.\
\
\'91Then, you know,\'92 the Mock Turtle went on, \'91you throw the--\'92\
\
\'91The lobsters!\'92 shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.\
\
\'91--as far out to sea as you can--\'92\
\
\'91Swim after them!\'92 screamed the Gryphon.\
\
\'91Turn a somersault in the sea!\'92 cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly\
about.\
\
\'91Change lobsters again!\'92 yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.\
\
\'91Back to land again, and that\'92s all the first figure,\'92 said the Mock\
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been\
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly\
and quietly, and looked at Alice.\
\
\'91It must be a very pretty dance,\'92 said Alice timidly.\
\
\'91Would you like to see a little of it?\'92 said the Mock Turtle.\
\
\'91Very much indeed,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Come, let\'92s try the first figure!\'92 said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon.\
\'91We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?\'92\
\
\'91Oh, YOU sing,\'92 said the Gryphon. \'91I\'92ve forgotten the words.\'92\
\
So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and\
then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their\
forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly\
and sadly:--\
\
 \'91\'93Will you walk a little faster?\'94 said a whiting to a snail.\
 \'93There\'92s a porpoise close behind us, and he\'92s treading on my tail.\
\
 See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!\
 They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?\
\
 Will you, won\'92t you, will you, won\'92t you, will you join the dance?\
 Will you, won\'92t you, will you, won\'92t you, won\'92t you join the dance?\
\
 \'93You can really have no notion how delightful it will be\
 When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!\'94\
  But the snail replied \'93Too far, too far!\'94 and gave a look askance--\
 Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.\
\
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.\
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.\
\
 \'91\'93What matters it how far we go?\'94 his scaly friend replied.\
 \'93There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.\
 The further off from England the nearer is to France--\
 Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.\
\
 Will you, won\'92t you, will you, won\'92t you, will you join the dance?\
 Will you, won\'92t you, will you, won\'92t you, won\'92t you join the dance?\'94\'92\
\
\'91Thank you, it\'92s a very interesting dance to watch,\'92 said Alice, feeling\
very glad that it was over at last: \'91and I do so like that curious song\
about the whiting!\'92\
\
\'91Oh, as to the whiting,\'92 said the Mock Turtle, \'91they--you\'92ve seen them,\
of course?\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Alice, \'91I\'92ve often seen them at dinn--\'92 she checked herself\
hastily.\
\
\'91I don\'92t know where Dinn may be,\'92 said the Mock Turtle, \'91but if you\'92ve\
seen them so often, of course you know what they\'92re like.\'92\
\
\'91I believe so,\'92 Alice replied thoughtfully. \'91They have their tails in\
their mouths--and they\'92re all over crumbs.\'92\
\
\'91You\'92re wrong about the crumbs,\'92 said the Mock Turtle: \'91crumbs would all\
wash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails in their mouths; and the\
reason is--\'92 here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--\'91Tell her\
about the reason and all that,\'92 he said to the Gryphon.\
\
\'91The reason is,\'92 said the Gryphon, \'91that they WOULD go with the lobsters\
to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long\
way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn\'92t get\
them out again. That\'92s all.\'92\
\
\'91Thank you,\'92 said Alice, \'91it\'92s very interesting. I never knew so much\
about a whiting before.\'92\
\
\'91I can tell you more than that, if you like,\'92 said the Gryphon. \'91Do you\
know why it\'92s called a whiting?\'92\
\
\'91I never thought about it,\'92 said Alice. \'91Why?\'92\
\
\'91IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.\'92 the Gryphon replied very solemnly.\
\
Alice was thoroughly puzzled. \'91Does the boots and shoes!\'92 she repeated\
in a wondering tone.\
\
\'91Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?\'92 said the Gryphon. \'91I mean, what\
makes them so shiny?\'92\
\
Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her\
answer. \'91They\'92re done with blacking, I believe.\'92\
\
\'91Boots and shoes under the sea,\'92 the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,\
\'91are done with a whiting. Now you know.\'92\
\
\'91And what are they made of?\'92 Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.\
\
\'91Soles and eels, of course,\'92 the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:\
\'91any shrimp could have told you that.\'92\
\
\'91If I\'92d been the whiting,\'92 said Alice, whose thoughts were still running\
on the song, \'91I\'92d have said to the porpoise, \'93Keep back, please: we\
don\'92t want YOU with us!\'94\'92\
\
\'91They were obliged to have him with them,\'92 the Mock Turtle said: \'91no\
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.\'92\
\
\'91Wouldn\'92t it really?\'92 said Alice in a tone of great surprise.\
\
\'91Of course not,\'92 said the Mock Turtle: \'91why, if a fish came to ME, and\
told me he was going a journey, I should say \'93With what porpoise?\'94\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t you mean \'93purpose\'94?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91I mean what I say,\'92 the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And\
the Gryphon added \'91Come, let\'92s hear some of YOUR adventures.\'92\
\
\'91I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,\'92 said\
Alice a little timidly: \'91but it\'92s no use going back to yesterday,\
because I was a different person then.\'92\
\
\'91Explain all that,\'92 said the Mock Turtle.\
\
\'91No, no! The adventures first,\'92 said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:\
\'91explanations take such a dreadful time.\'92\
\
So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first\
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,\
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened\
their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she went\
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about\
her repeating \'91YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,\'92 to the Caterpillar, and the\
words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath,\
and said \'91That\'92s very curious.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s all about as curious as it can be,\'92 said the Gryphon.\
\
\'91It all came different!\'92 the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. \'91I\
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to\
begin.\'92 He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of\
authority over Alice.\
\
\'91Stand up and repeat \'93\'91TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,\'94\'92 said the\
Gryphon.\
\
\'91How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!\'92\
thought Alice; \'91I might as well be at school at once.\'92 However, she\
got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster\
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came\
very queer indeed:--\
\
  \'91\'92Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,\
  \'93You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.\'94\
   As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose\
  Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.\'92\
\
       [later editions continued as follows\
  When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,\
  And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,\
  But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,\
  His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]\
\
\'91That\'92s different from what I used to say when I was a child,\'92 said the\
Gryphon.\
\
\'91Well, I never heard it before,\'92 said the Mock Turtle; \'91but it sounds\
uncommon nonsense.\'92\
\
Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,\
wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again.\
\
\'91I should like to have it explained,\'92 said the Mock Turtle.\
\
\'91She can\'92t explain it,\'92 said the Gryphon hastily. \'91Go on with the next\
verse.\'92\
\
\'91But about his toes?\'92 the Mock Turtle persisted. \'91How COULD he turn them\
out with his nose, you know?\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s the first position in dancing.\'92 Alice said; but was dreadfully\
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.\
\
\'91Go on with the next verse,\'92 the Gryphon repeated impatiently: \'91it\
begins \'93I passed by his garden.\'94\'92\
\
Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come\
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--\
\
  \'91I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,\
  How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--\'92\
\
    [later editions continued as follows\
  The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,\
  While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.\
  When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,\
  Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:\
  While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,\
  And concluded the banquet--]\
\
\'91What IS the use of repeating all that stuff,\'92 the Mock Turtle\
interrupted, \'91if you don\'92t explain it as you go on? It\'92s by far the most\
confusing thing I ever heard!\'92\
\
\'91Yes, I think you\'92d better leave off,\'92 said the Gryphon: and Alice was\
only too glad to do so.\
\
\'91Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?\'92 the Gryphon went\
on. \'91Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?\'92\
\
\'91Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,\'92 Alice\
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,\
\'91Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her \'93Turtle Soup,\'94 will you, old\
fellow?\'92\
\
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked\
with sobs, to sing this:--\
\
   \'91Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,\
   Waiting in a hot tureen!\
   Who for such dainties would not stoop?\
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!\
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!\
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!\
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!\
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,\
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!\
\
   \'91Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,\
   Game, or any other dish?\
   Who would not give all else for two\
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?\
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?\
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!\
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!\
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,\
     Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!\'92\
\
\'91Chorus again!\'92 cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun\
to repeat it, when a cry of \'91The trial\'92s beginning!\'92 was heard in the\
distance.\
\
\'91Come on!\'92 cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried\
off, without waiting for the end of the song.\
\
\'91What trial is it?\'92 Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only\
answered \'91Come on!\'92 and ran the faster, while more and more faintly\
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--\
\
   \'91Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,\
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!\'92\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER XI. Who Stole the Tarts?\
\
The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they\
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little\
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was\
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard\
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand,\
and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court\
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good,\
that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--\'91I wish they\'92d get the\
trial done,\'92 she thought, \'91and hand round the refreshments!\'92 But there\
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about\
her, to pass away the time.\
\
Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read\
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew\
the name of nearly everything there. \'91That\'92s the judge,\'92 she said to\
herself, \'91because of his great wig.\'92\
\
The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the\
wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did\
not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.\
\
\'91And that\'92s the jury-box,\'92 thought Alice, \'91and those twelve creatures,\'92\
(she was obliged to say \'91creatures,\'92 you see, because some of them were\
animals, and some were birds,) \'91I suppose they are the jurors.\'92 She said\
this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of\
it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her\
age knew the meaning of it at all. However, \'91jury-men\'92 would have done\
just as well.\
\
The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. \'91What are they\
doing?\'92 Alice whispered to the Gryphon. \'91They can\'92t have anything to put\
down yet, before the trial\'92s begun.\'92\
\
\'91They\'92re putting down their names,\'92 the Gryphon whispered in reply, \'91for\
fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.\'92\
\
\'91Stupid things!\'92 Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped\
hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, \'91Silence in the court!\'92 and the\
King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who\
was talking.\
\
Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,\
that all the jurors were writing down \'91stupid things!\'92 on their slates,\
and she could even make out that one of them didn\'92t know how to spell\
\'91stupid,\'92 and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. \'91A nice\
muddle their slates\'92ll be in before the trial\'92s over!\'92 thought Alice.\
\
One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice\
could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and\
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly\
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out\
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was\
obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was\
of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.\
\
\'91Herald, read the accusation!\'92 said the King.\
\
On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then\
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--\
\
   \'91The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,\
      All on a summer day:\
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,\
      And took them quite away!\'92\
\
\'91Consider your verdict,\'92 the King said to the jury.\
\
\'91Not yet, not yet!\'92 the Rabbit hastily interrupted. \'91There\'92s a great\
deal to come before that!\'92\
\
\'91Call the first witness,\'92 said the King; and the White Rabbit blew three\
blasts on the trumpet, and called out, \'91First witness!\'92\
\
The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one\
hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. \'91I beg pardon, your\
Majesty,\'92 he began, \'91for bringing these in: but I hadn\'92t quite finished\
my tea when I was sent for.\'92\
\
\'91You ought to have finished,\'92 said the King. \'91When did you begin?\'92\
\
The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the\
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. \'91Fourteenth of March, I think it\
was,\'92 he said.\
\
\'91Fifteenth,\'92 said the March Hare.\
\
\'91Sixteenth,\'92 added the Dormouse.\
\
\'91Write that down,\'92 the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly\
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and\
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.\
\
\'91Take off your hat,\'92 the King said to the Hatter.\
\
\'91It isn\'92t mine,\'92 said the Hatter.\
\
\'91Stolen!\'92 the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a\
memorandum of the fact.\
\
\'91I keep them to sell,\'92 the Hatter added as an explanation; \'91I\'92ve none of\
my own. I\'92m a hatter.\'92\
\
Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter,\
who turned pale and fidgeted.\
\
\'91Give your evidence,\'92 said the King; \'91and don\'92t be nervous, or I\'92ll have\
you executed on the spot.\'92\
\
This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting\
from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in\
his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the\
bread-and-butter.\
\
Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled\
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to\
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave\
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as\
long as there was room for her.\
\
\'91I wish you wouldn\'92t squeeze so.\'92 said the Dormouse, who was sitting\
next to her. \'91I can hardly breathe.\'92\
\
\'91I can\'92t help it,\'92 said Alice very meekly: \'91I\'92m growing.\'92\
\
\'91You\'92ve no right to grow here,\'92 said the Dormouse.\
\
\'91Don\'92t talk nonsense,\'92 said Alice more boldly: \'91you know you\'92re growing\
too.\'92\
\
\'91Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,\'92 said the Dormouse: \'91not in that\
ridiculous fashion.\'92 And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the\
other side of the court.\
\
All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,\
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers\
of the court, \'91Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!\'92 on\
which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.\
\
\'91Give your evidence,\'92 the King repeated angrily, \'91or I\'92ll have you\
executed, whether you\'92re nervous or not.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m a poor man, your Majesty,\'92 the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,\
\'91--and I hadn\'92t begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the\
bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea--\'92\
\
\'91The twinkling of the what?\'92 said the King.\
\
\'91It began with the tea,\'92 the Hatter replied.\
\
\'91Of course twinkling begins with a T!\'92 said the King sharply. \'91Do you\
take me for a dunce? Go on!\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m a poor man,\'92 the Hatter went on, \'91and most things twinkled after\
that--only the March Hare said--\'92\
\
\'91I didn\'92t!\'92 the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.\
\
\'91You did!\'92 said the Hatter.\
\
\'91I deny it!\'92 said the March Hare.\
\
\'91He denies it,\'92 said the King: \'91leave out that part.\'92\
\
\'91Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--\'92 the Hatter went on, looking\
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied\
nothing, being fast asleep.\
\
\'91After that,\'92 continued the Hatter, \'91I cut some more bread-and-butter--\'92\
\
\'91But what did the Dormouse say?\'92 one of the jury asked.\
\
\'91That I can\'92t remember,\'92 said the Hatter.\
\
\'91You MUST remember,\'92 remarked the King, \'91or I\'92ll have you executed.\'92\
\
The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went\
down on one knee. \'91I\'92m a poor man, your Majesty,\'92 he began.\
\
\'91You\'92re a very poor speaker,\'92 said the King.\
\
Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by\
the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just\
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied\
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,\
head first, and then sat upon it.)\
\
\'91I\'92m glad I\'92ve seen that done,\'92 thought Alice. \'91I\'92ve so often read\
in the newspapers, at the end of trials, \'93There was some attempts\
at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the\
court,\'94 and I never understood what it meant till now.\'92\
\
\'91If that\'92s all you know about it, you may stand down,\'92 continued the\
King.\
\
\'91I can\'92t go no lower,\'92 said the Hatter: \'91I\'92m on the floor, as it is.\'92\
\
\'91Then you may SIT down,\'92 the King replied.\
\
Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.\
\
\'91Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!\'92 thought Alice. \'91Now we shall get\
on better.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92d rather finish my tea,\'92 said the Hatter, with an anxious look at the\
Queen, who was reading the list of singers.\
\
\'91You may go,\'92 said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,\
without even waiting to put his shoes on.\
\
\'91--and just take his head off outside,\'92 the Queen added to one of the\
officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get\
to the door.\
\
\'91Call the next witness!\'92 said the King.\
\
The next witness was the Duchess\'92s cook. She carried the pepper-box in\
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the\
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.\
\
\'91Give your evidence,\'92 said the King.\
\
\'91Shan\'92t,\'92 said the cook.\
\
The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,\
\'91Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.\'92\
\
\'91Well, if I must, I must,\'92 the King said, with a melancholy air, and,\
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were\
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, \'91What are tarts made of?\'92\
\
\'91Pepper, mostly,\'92 said the cook.\
\
\'91Treacle,\'92 said a sleepy voice behind her.\
\
\'91Collar that Dormouse,\'92 the Queen shrieked out. \'91Behead that Dormouse!\
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his\
whiskers!\'92\
\
For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse\
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had\
disappeared.\
\
\'91Never mind!\'92 said the King, with an air of great relief. \'91Call the next\
witness.\'92 And he added in an undertone to the Queen, \'91Really, my dear,\
YOU must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead\
ache!\'92\
\
Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very\
curious to see what the next witness would be like, \'91--for they haven\'92t\
got much evidence YET,\'92 she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when\
the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the\
name \'91Alice!\'92\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER XII. Alice\'92s Evidence\
\
\
\'91Here!\'92 cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how\
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such\
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,\
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there\
they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish\
she had accidentally upset the week before.\
\
\'91Oh, I BEG your pardon!\'92 she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and\
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of\
the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea\
that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or\
they would die.\
\
\'91The trial cannot proceed,\'92 said the King in a very grave voice, \'91until\
all the jurymen are back in their proper places--ALL,\'92 he repeated with\
great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.\
\
Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put\
the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its\
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got\
it out again, and put it right; \'91not that it signifies much,\'92 she said\
to herself; \'91I should think it would be QUITE as much use in the trial\
one way up as the other.\'92\
\
As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being\
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to\
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the\
accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do\
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the\
court.\
\
\'91What do you know about this business?\'92 the King said to Alice.\
\
\'91Nothing,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Nothing WHATEVER?\'92 persisted the King.\
\
\'91Nothing whatever,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91That\'92s very important,\'92 the King said, turning to the jury. They were\
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit\
interrupted: \'91UNimportant, your Majesty means, of course,\'92 he said in a\
very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.\
\
\'91UNimportant, of course, I meant,\'92 the King hastily said, and went on\
to himself in an undertone,\
\
\'91important--unimportant--unimportant--important--\'92 as if he were trying\
which word sounded best.\
\
Some of the jury wrote it down \'91important,\'92 and some \'91unimportant.\'92\
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;\
\'91but it doesn\'92t matter a bit,\'92 she thought to herself.\
\
At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in\
his note-book, cackled out \'91Silence!\'92 and read out from his book, \'91Rule\
Forty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.\'92\
\
Everybody looked at Alice.\
\
\'91I\'92M not a mile high,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91You are,\'92 said the King.\
\
\'91Nearly two miles high,\'92 added the Queen.\
\
\'91Well, I shan\'92t go, at any rate,\'92 said Alice: \'91besides, that\'92s not a\
regular rule: you invented it just now.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s the oldest rule in the book,\'92 said the King.\
\
\'91Then it ought to be Number One,\'92 said Alice.\
\
The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. \'91Consider your\
verdict,\'92 he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.\
\
\'91There\'92s more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,\'92 said the White\
Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; \'91this paper has just been picked\
up.\'92\
\
\'91What\'92s in it?\'92 said the Queen.\
\
\'91I haven\'92t opened it yet,\'92 said the White Rabbit, \'91but it seems to be a\
letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.\'92\
\
\'91It must have been that,\'92 said the King, \'91unless it was written to\
nobody, which isn\'92t usual, you know.\'92\
\
\'91Who is it directed to?\'92 said one of the jurymen.\
\
\'91It isn\'92t directed at all,\'92 said the White Rabbit; \'91in fact, there\'92s\
nothing written on the OUTSIDE.\'92 He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and\
added \'91It isn\'92t a letter, after all: it\'92s a set of verses.\'92\
\
\'91Are they in the prisoner\'92s handwriting?\'92 asked another of the jurymen.\
\
\'91No, they\'92re not,\'92 said the White Rabbit, \'91and that\'92s the queerest thing\
about it.\'92 (The jury all looked puzzled.)\
\
\'91He must have imitated somebody else\'92s hand,\'92 said the King. (The jury\
all brightened up again.)\
\
\'91Please your Majesty,\'92 said the Knave, \'91I didn\'92t write it, and they\
can\'92t prove I did: there\'92s no name signed at the end.\'92\
\
\'91If you didn\'92t sign it,\'92 said the King, \'91that only makes the matter\
worse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you\'92d have signed your\
name like an honest man.\'92\
\
There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really\
clever thing the King had said that day.\
\
\'91That PROVES his guilt,\'92 said the Queen.\
\
\'91It proves nothing of the sort!\'92 said Alice. \'91Why, you don\'92t even know\
what they\'92re about!\'92\
\
\'91Read them,\'92 said the King.\
\
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. \'91Where shall I begin, please\
your Majesty?\'92 he asked.\
\
\'91Begin at the beginning,\'92 the King said gravely, \'91and go on till you\
come to the end: then stop.\'92\
\
These were the verses the White Rabbit read:--\
\
   \'91They told me you had been to her,\
    And mentioned me to him:\
   She gave me a good character,\
    But said I could not swim.\
\
   He sent them word I had not gone\
    (We know it to be true):\
   If she should push the matter on,\
    What would become of you?\
\
   I gave her one, they gave him two,\
    You gave us three or more;\
   They all returned from him to you,\
    Though they were mine before.\
\
   If I or she should chance to be\
    Involved in this affair,\
   He trusts to you to set them free,\
    Exactly as we were.\
\
   My notion was that you had been\
    (Before she had this fit)\
   An obstacle that came between\
    Him, and ourselves, and it.\
\
   Don\'92t let him know she liked them best,\
    For this must ever be\
   A secret, kept from all the rest,\
    Between yourself and me.\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s the most important piece of evidence we\'92ve heard yet,\'92 said the\
King, rubbing his hands; \'91so now let the jury--\'92\
\
\'91If any one of them can explain it,\'92 said Alice, (she had grown so large\
in the last few minutes that she wasn\'92t a bit afraid of interrupting\
him,) \'91I\'92ll give him sixpence. _I_ don\'92t believe there\'92s an atom of\
meaning in it.\'92\
\
The jury all wrote down on their slates, \'91SHE doesn\'92t believe there\'92s an\
atom of meaning in it,\'92 but none of them attempted to explain the paper.\
\
\'91If there\'92s no meaning in it,\'92 said the King, \'91that saves a world of\
trouble, you know, as we needn\'92t try to find any. And yet I don\'92t know,\'92\
he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them\
with one eye; \'91I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. \'93--SAID\
I COULD NOT SWIM--\'94 you can\'92t swim, can you?\'92 he added, turning to the\
Knave.\
\
The Knave shook his head sadly. \'91Do I look like it?\'92 he said. (Which he\
certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)\
\
\'91All right, so far,\'92 said the King, and he went on muttering over\
the verses to himself: \'91\'93WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--\'94 that\'92s the jury, of\
course--\'93I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--\'94 why, that must be what he\
did with the tarts, you know--\'92\
\
\'91But, it goes on \'93THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,\'94\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Why, there they are!\'92 said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts\
on the table. \'91Nothing can be clearer than THAT. Then again--\'93BEFORE SHE\
HAD THIS FIT--\'94 you never had fits, my dear, I think?\'92 he said to the\
Queen.\
\
\'91Never!\'92 said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard\
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his\
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily\
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as\
it lasted.)\
\
\'91Then the words don\'92t FIT you,\'92 said the King, looking round the court\
with a smile. There was a dead silence.\
\
\'91It\'92s a pun!\'92 the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed,\
\'91Let the jury consider their verdict,\'92 the King said, for about the\
twentieth time that day.\
\
\'91No, no!\'92 said the Queen. \'91Sentence first--verdict afterwards.\'92\
\
\'91Stuff and nonsense!\'92 said Alice loudly. \'91The idea of having the\
sentence first!\'92\
\
\'91Hold your tongue!\'92 said the Queen, turning purple.\
\
\'91I won\'92t!\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Off with her head!\'92 the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody\
moved.\
\
\'91Who cares for you?\'92 said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this\
time.) \'91You\'92re nothing but a pack of cards!\'92\
\
At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon\
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and\
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her\
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead\
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.\
\
\'91Wake up, Alice dear!\'92 said her sister; \'91Why, what a long sleep you\'92ve\
had!\'92\
\
\'91Oh, I\'92ve had such a curious dream!\'92 said Alice, and she told her\
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures\
of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had\
finished, her sister kissed her, and said, \'91It WAS a curious dream,\
dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it\'92s getting late.\'92 So\
Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,\
what a wonderful dream it had been.\
\
But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her\
hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her\
wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and\
this was her dream:--\
\
First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny\
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking\
up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that\
queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that\
WOULD always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to\
listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures\
of her little sister\'92s dream.\
\
The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the\
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she\
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends\
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen\
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby\
was sneezing on the Duchess\'92s knee, while plates and dishes crashed\
around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the\
Lizard\'92s slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,\
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock\
Turtle.\
\
So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in\
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all\
would change to dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the\
wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling\
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen\'92s shrill\
cries to the voice of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the\
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she\
knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing\
of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle\'92s\
heavy sobs.\
\
Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers\
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would\
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her\
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and\
make THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even\
with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with\
all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,\
remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.\
\
              THE END\
\
\
\
\
\
End of Project Gutenberg\'92s Alice\'92s Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll\
\
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE\'92S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***\
\
***** This file should be named 11-0.txt or 11-0.zip *****\
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:\
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/11/\
\
\
\
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions\
will be renamed.\
\
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no\
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation\
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without\
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,\
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to\
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to\
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project\
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you\
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you\
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the\
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose\
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and\
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do\
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is\
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial\
redistribution.\
\
\
\
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***\
\
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE\
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK\
\
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free\
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work\
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase \'93Project\
Gutenberg\'94), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project\
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at\
http://gutenberg.org/license).\
\
\
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic works\
\
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to\
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property\
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all\
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy\
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.\
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the\
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or\
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.\
\
1.B.  \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 is a registered trademark.  It may only be\
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who\
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few\
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works\
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See\
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement\
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.\
\
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (\'93the Foundation\'94\
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the\
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an\
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are\
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from\
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative\
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg\
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project\
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by\
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of\
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with\
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by\
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project\
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.\
\
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern\
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in\
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check\
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement\
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or\
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project\
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning\
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United\
States.\
\
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:\
\
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate\
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently\
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the\
phrase \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 appears, or with which the phrase \'93Project\
Gutenberg\'94 is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,\
copied or distributed:\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or\
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org\
\
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived\
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is\
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied\
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees\
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work\
with the phrase \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 associated with or appearing on the\
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1\
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the\
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or\
1.E.9.\
\
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted\
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution\
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional\
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked\
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the\
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.\
\
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this\
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.\
\
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this\
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without\
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with\
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm License.\
\
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,\
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any\
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or\
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than\
\'93Plain Vanilla ASCII\'94 or other format used in the official version\
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),\
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a\
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon\
request, of the work in its original \'93Plain Vanilla ASCII\'94 or other\
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.\
\
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,\
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works\
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\
\
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing\
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided\
that\
\
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from\
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method\
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is\
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he\
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the\
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments\
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you\
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax\
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and\
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the\
     address specified in Section 4, \'93Information about donations to\
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.\'94\
\
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies\
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he\
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
     License.  You must require such a user to return or\
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium\
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of\
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.\
\
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any\
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the\
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days\
     of receipt of the work.\
\
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free\
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.\
\
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set\
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from\
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael\
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the\
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.\
\
1.F.\
\
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable\
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread\
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm\
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain\
\'93Defects,\'94 such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or\
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual\
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a\
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by\
your equipment.\
\
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the \'93Right\
of Replacement or Refund\'94 described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all\
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal\
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT\
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE\
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE\
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE\
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR\
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH\
DAMAGE.\
\
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a\
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can\
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a\
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you\
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with\
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with\
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a\
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity\
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to\
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy\
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further\
opportunities to fix the problem.\
\
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth\
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you \'91AS-IS\'92 WITH NO OTHER\
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO\
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.\
\
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied\
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.\
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the\
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be\
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by\
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any\
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.\
\
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the\
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone\
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance\
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,\
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,\
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,\
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do\
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm\
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any\
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.\
\
\
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of\
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers\
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists\
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from\
people in all walks of life.\
\
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the\
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm\'92s\
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will\
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure\
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.\
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation\
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4\
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.\
\
\
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive\
Foundation\
\
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit\
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the\
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal\
Revenue Service.  The Foundation\'92s EIN or federal tax identification\
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at\
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg\
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent\
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state\'92s laws.\
\
The Foundation\'92s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.\
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered\
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at\
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email\
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact\
information can be found at the Foundation\'92s web site and official\
page at http://pglaf.org\
\
For additional contact information:\
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby\
     Chief Executive and Director\
     gbnewby@pglaf.org\
\
\
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg\
Literary Archive Foundation\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide\
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of\
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be\
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest\
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations\
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt\
status with the IRS.\
\
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating\
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United\
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a\
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up\
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations\
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To\
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any\
particular state visit http://pglaf.org\
\
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we\
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition\
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who\
approach us with offers to donate.\
\
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make\
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from\
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.\
\
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation\
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other\
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.\
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate\
\
\
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works.\
\
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm\
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared\
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project\
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.\
\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed\
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.\
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily\
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.\
\
\
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:\
\
     http://www.gutenberg.org\
\
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,\
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary\
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to\
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.\
}