{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Project Gutenberg EBook of David Copperfield, by Charles Dickens\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or\
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org\
\
\
Title: David Copperfield\
\
Author: Charles Dickens\
\
Release Date: December, 1996  [Etext #766]\
Posting Date: November 24, 2009\
Last Updated: September 25, 2016\
\
Language: English\
\
Character set encoding: UTF-8\
\
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID COPPERFIELD ***\
\
\
\
\
Produced by Jo Churcher\
\
\
\
\
\
DAVID COPPERFIELD\
\
\
By Charles Dickens\
\
\
\
               AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED TO\
               THE HON.  Mr. AND Mrs. RICHARD WATSON,\
               OF ROCKINGHAM, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.\
\
\
CONTENTS\
\
\
     I.      I Am Born\
     II.     I Observe\
     III.    I Have a Change\
     IV.     I Fall into Disgrace\
     V.      I Am Sent Away\
     VI.     I Enlarge My Circle of Acquaintance\
     VII.    My \'91First Half\'92 at Salem House\
     VIII.   My Holidays.  Especially One Happy Afternoon\
     IX.     I Have a Memorable Birthday\
     X.      I Become Neglected, and Am Provided For\
     XI.     I Begin Life on My Own Account, and Don\'92t Like It\
     XII.    Liking Life on My Own Account No Better, I Form a Great Resolution\
     XIII.   The Sequel of My Resolution\
     XIV.    My Aunt Makes up Her Mind About Me\
     XV.     I Make Another Beginning\
     XVI.    I Am a New Boy in More Senses Than One\
     XVII.   Somebody Turns Up\
     XVIII.  A Retrospect\
     XIX.    I Look About Me and Make a Discovery\
     XX.     Steerforth\'92s Home\
     XXI.    Little Em\'92ly\
     XXII.   Some Old Scenes, and Some New People\
     XXIII.  I Corroborate Mr. Dick, and Choose a Profession\
     XXIV.   My First Dissipation\
     XXV.    Good and Bad Angels\
     XXVI.   I Fall into Captivity\
     XXVII.  Tommy Traddles\
     XXVIII. Mr. Micawber\'92s Gauntlet\
     XXIX.   I Visit Steerforth at His Home, Again\
     XXX.    A Loss\
     XXXI.   A Greater Loss\
     XXXII.  The Beginning of a Long Journey\
     XXXIII. Blissful\
     XXXIV.  My Aunt Astonishes Me\
     XXXV.   Depression\
     XXXVI.  Enthusiasm\
     XXXVII.  A Little Cold Water\
     XXXVIII. A Dissolution of Partnership\
     XXXIX.   Wickfield and Heep\
     XL.      The Wanderer\
     XLI.     Dora\'92s Aunts\
     XLII.    Mischief\
     XLIII.   Another Retrospect\
     XLIV.    Our Housekeeping\
     XLV.     Mr. Dick Fulfils My Aunt\'92s Predictions\
     XLVI.    Intelligence\
     XLVII.   Martha\
     XLVIII.  Domestic\
     XLIX.    I Am Involved in Mystery\
     L.       Mr. Peggotty\'92s Dream Comes True\
     LI.      The Beginning of a Longer Journey\
     LII.     I Assist at an Explosion\
     LIII.    Another Retrospect\
     LIV.     Mr. Micawber\'92s Transactions\
     LV.      Tempest\
     LVI.     The New Wound, and the Old\
     LVII.    The Emigrants\
     LVIII.   Absence\
     LIX.     Return\
     LX.      Agnes\
     LXI.     I Am Shown Two Interesting Penitents\
     LXII.    A Light Shines on My Way\
     LXIII.   A Visitor\
     LXIV.    A Last Retrospect\
\
\
\
\
PREFACE TO 1850 EDITION\
\
\
I do not find it easy to get sufficiently far away from this Book, in\
the first sensations of having finished it, to refer to it with the\
composure which this formal heading would seem to require. My interest\
in it, is so recent and strong; and my mind is so divided between\
pleasure and regret--pleasure in the achievement of a long design,\
regret in the separation from many companions--that I am in danger of\
wearying the reader whom I love, with personal confidences, and private\
emotions.\
\
Besides which, all that I could say of the Story, to any purpose, I have\
endeavoured to say in it.\
\
It would concern the reader little, perhaps, to know, how sorrowfully\
the pen is laid down at the close of a two-years\'92 imaginative task; or\
how an Author feels as if he were dismissing some portion of himself\
into the shadowy world, when a crowd of the creatures of his brain\
are going from him for ever. Yet, I have nothing else to tell; unless,\
indeed, I were to confess (which might be of less moment still) that no\
one can ever believe this Narrative, in the reading, more than I have\
believed it in the writing.\
\
Instead of looking back, therefore, I will look forward. I cannot close\
this Volume more agreeably to myself, than with a hopeful glance towards\
the time when I shall again put forth my two green leaves once a month,\
and with a faithful remembrance of the genial sun and showers that have\
fallen on these leaves of David Copperfield, and made me happy.\
\
     London, October, 1850.\
\
\
\
\
PREFACE TO THE CHARLES DICKENS EDITION\
\
\
I REMARKED in the original Preface to this Book, that I did not find it\
easy to get sufficiently far away from it, in the first sensations of\
having finished it, to refer to it with the composure which this formal\
heading would seem to require. My interest in it was so recent and\
strong, and my mind was so divided between pleasure and regret--pleasure\
in the achievement of a long design, regret in the separation from many\
companions--that I was in danger of wearying the reader with personal\
confidences and private emotions.\
\
Besides which, all that I could have said of the Story to any purpose, I\
had endeavoured to say in it.\
\
It would concern the reader little, perhaps, to know how sorrowfully the\
pen is laid down at the close of a two-years\'92 imaginative task; or how\
an Author feels as if he were dismissing some portion of himself into\
the shadowy world, when a crowd of the creatures of his brain are going\
from him for ever. Yet, I had nothing else to tell; unless, indeed, I\
were to confess (which might be of less moment still), that no one can\
ever believe this Narrative, in the reading, more than I believed it in\
the writing.\
\
So true are these avowals at the present day, that I can now only take\
the reader into one confidence more. Of all my books, I like this the\
best. It will be easily believed that I am a fond parent to every child\
of my fancy, and that no one can ever love that family as dearly as I\
love them. But, like many fond parents, I have in my heart of hearts a\
favourite child. And his name is\
\
DAVID COPPERFIELD.\
\
     1869\
\
\
\
\
THE PERSONAL HISTORY AND EXPERIENCE OF DAVID COPPERFIELD THE YOUNGER\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 1. I AM BORN\
\
\
\
Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life, or whether that\
station will be held by anybody else, these pages must show. To begin my\
life with the beginning of my life, I record that I was born (as I have\
been informed and believe) on a Friday, at twelve o\'92clock at night.\
It was remarked that the clock began to strike, and I began to cry,\
simultaneously.\
\
In consideration of the day and hour of my birth, it was declared by\
the nurse, and by some sage women in the neighbourhood who had taken a\
lively interest in me several months before there was any possibility\
of our becoming personally acquainted, first, that I was destined to be\
unlucky in life; and secondly, that I was privileged to see ghosts and\
spirits; both these gifts inevitably attaching, as they believed, to\
all unlucky infants of either gender, born towards the small hours on a\
Friday night.\
\
I need say nothing here, on the first head, because nothing can show\
better than my history whether that prediction was verified or falsified\
by the result. On the second branch of the question, I will only remark,\
that unless I ran through that part of my inheritance while I was still\
a baby, I have not come into it yet. But I do not at all complain of\
having been kept out of this property; and if anybody else should be in\
the present enjoyment of it, he is heartily welcome to keep it.\
\
I was born with a caul, which was advertised for sale, in the\
newspapers, at the low price of fifteen guineas. Whether sea-going\
people were short of money about that time, or were short of faith and\
preferred cork jackets, I don\'92t know; all I know is, that there was but\
one solitary bidding, and that was from an attorney connected with the\
bill-broking business, who offered two pounds in cash, and the balance\
in sherry, but declined to be guaranteed from drowning on any higher\
bargain. Consequently the advertisement was withdrawn at a dead\
loss--for as to sherry, my poor dear mother\'92s own sherry was in the\
market then--and ten years afterwards, the caul was put up in a raffle\
down in our part of the country, to fifty members at half-a-crown a\
head, the winner to spend five shillings. I was present myself, and I\
remember to have felt quite uncomfortable and confused, at a part of\
myself being disposed of in that way. The caul was won, I recollect, by\
an old lady with a hand-basket, who, very reluctantly, produced from it\
the stipulated five shillings, all in halfpence, and twopence halfpenny\
short--as it took an immense time and a great waste of arithmetic, to\
endeavour without any effect to prove to her. It is a fact which will\
be long remembered as remarkable down there, that she was never drowned,\
but died triumphantly in bed, at ninety-two. I have understood that it\
was, to the last, her proudest boast, that she never had been on the\
water in her life, except upon a bridge; and that over her tea (to which\
she was extremely partial) she, to the last, expressed her indignation\
at the impiety of mariners and others, who had the presumption to go\
\'91meandering\'92 about the world. It was in vain to represent to her\
that some conveniences, tea perhaps included, resulted from this\
objectionable practice. She always returned, with greater emphasis and\
with an instinctive knowledge of the strength of her objection, \'91Let us\
have no meandering.\'92\
\
Not to meander myself, at present, I will go back to my birth.\
\
I was born at Blunderstone, in Suffolk, or \'91there by\'92, as they say in\
Scotland. I was a posthumous child. My father\'92s eyes had closed upon\
the light of this world six months, when mine opened on it. There is\
something strange to me, even now, in the reflection that he never saw\
me; and something stranger yet in the shadowy remembrance that I have\
of my first childish associations with his white grave-stone in the\
churchyard, and of the indefinable compassion I used to feel for it\
lying out alone there in the dark night, when our little parlour\
was warm and bright with fire and candle, and the doors of our house\
were--almost cruelly, it seemed to me sometimes--bolted and locked\
against it.\
\
An aunt of my father\'92s, and consequently a great-aunt of mine, of whom\
I shall have more to relate by and by, was the principal magnate of our\
family. Miss Trotwood, or Miss Betsey, as my poor mother always called\
her, when she sufficiently overcame her dread of this formidable\
personage to mention her at all (which was seldom), had been married\
to a husband younger than herself, who was very handsome, except in the\
sense of the homely adage, \'91handsome is, that handsome does\'92--for he\
was strongly suspected of having beaten Miss Betsey, and even of having\
once, on a disputed question of supplies, made some hasty but determined\
arrangements to throw her out of a two pair of stairs\'92 window. These\
evidences of an incompatibility of temper induced Miss Betsey to pay him\
off, and effect a separation by mutual consent. He went to India with\
his capital, and there, according to a wild legend in our family, he was\
once seen riding on an elephant, in company with a Baboon; but I think\
it must have been a Baboo--or a Begum. Anyhow, from India tidings of his\
death reached home, within ten years. How they affected my aunt, nobody\
knew; for immediately upon the separation, she took her maiden name\
again, bought a cottage in a hamlet on the sea-coast a long way off,\
established herself there as a single woman with one servant, and\
was understood to live secluded, ever afterwards, in an inflexible\
retirement.\
\
My father had once been a favourite of hers, I believe; but she was\
mortally affronted by his marriage, on the ground that my mother was \'91a\
wax doll\'92. She had never seen my mother, but she knew her to be not\
yet twenty. My father and Miss Betsey never met again. He was double\
my mother\'92s age when he married, and of but a delicate constitution. He\
died a year afterwards, and, as I have said, six months before I came\
into the world.\
\
This was the state of matters, on the afternoon of, what I may be\
excused for calling, that eventful and important Friday. I can make no\
claim therefore to have known, at that time, how matters stood; or to\
have any remembrance, founded on the evidence of my own senses, of what\
follows.\
\
My mother was sitting by the fire, but poorly in health, and very low in\
spirits, looking at it through her tears, and desponding heavily about\
herself and the fatherless little stranger, who was already welcomed by\
some grosses of prophetic pins, in a drawer upstairs, to a world not at\
all excited on the subject of his arrival; my mother, I say, was sitting\
by the fire, that bright, windy March afternoon, very timid and sad, and\
very doubtful of ever coming alive out of the trial that was before her,\
when, lifting her eyes as she dried them, to the window opposite, she\
saw a strange lady coming up the garden.\
\
My mother had a sure foreboding at the second glance, that it was\
Miss Betsey. The setting sun was glowing on the strange lady, over the\
garden-fence, and she came walking up to the door with a fell rigidity\
of figure and composure of countenance that could have belonged to\
nobody else.\
\
When she reached the house, she gave another proof of her identity.\
My father had often hinted that she seldom conducted herself like any\
ordinary Christian; and now, instead of ringing the bell, she came and\
looked in at that identical window, pressing the end of her nose against\
the glass to that extent, that my poor dear mother used to say it became\
perfectly flat and white in a moment.\
\
She gave my mother such a turn, that I have always been convinced I am\
indebted to Miss Betsey for having been born on a Friday.\
\
My mother had left her chair in her agitation, and gone behind it in\
the corner. Miss Betsey, looking round the room, slowly and inquiringly,\
began on the other side, and carried her eyes on, like a Saracen\'92s Head\
in a Dutch clock, until they reached my mother. Then she made a frown\
and a gesture to my mother, like one who was accustomed to be obeyed, to\
come and open the door. My mother went.\
\
\'91Mrs. David Copperfield, I think,\'92 said Miss Betsey; the emphasis\
referring, perhaps, to my mother\'92s mourning weeds, and her condition.\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said my mother, faintly.\
\
\'91Miss Trotwood,\'92 said the visitor. \'91You have heard of her, I dare say?\'92\
\
My mother answered she had had that pleasure. And she had a disagreeable\
consciousness of not appearing to imply that it had been an overpowering\
pleasure.\
\
\'91Now you see her,\'92 said Miss Betsey. My mother bent her head, and begged\
her to walk in.\
\
They went into the parlour my mother had come from, the fire in the best\
room on the other side of the passage not being lighted--not having\
been lighted, indeed, since my father\'92s funeral; and when they were both\
seated, and Miss Betsey said nothing, my mother, after vainly trying to\
restrain herself, began to cry. \'91Oh tut, tut, tut!\'92 said Miss Betsey, in\
a hurry. \'91Don\'92t do that! Come, come!\'92\
\
My mother couldn\'92t help it notwithstanding, so she cried until she had\
had her cry out.\
\
\'91Take off your cap, child,\'92 said Miss Betsey, \'91and let me see you.\'92\
\
My mother was too much afraid of her to refuse compliance with this odd\
request, if she had any disposition to do so. Therefore she did as she\
was told, and did it with such nervous hands that her hair (which was\
luxuriant and beautiful) fell all about her face.\
\
\'91Why, bless my heart!\'92 exclaimed Miss Betsey. \'91You are a very Baby!\'92\
\
My mother was, no doubt, unusually youthful in appearance even for her\
years; she hung her head, as if it were her fault, poor thing, and said,\
sobbing, that indeed she was afraid she was but a childish widow, and\
would be but a childish mother if she lived. In a short pause which\
ensued, she had a fancy that she felt Miss Betsey touch her hair, and\
that with no ungentle hand; but, looking at her, in her timid hope, she\
found that lady sitting with the skirt of her dress tucked up, her hands\
folded on one knee, and her feet upon the fender, frowning at the fire.\
\
\'91In the name of Heaven,\'92 said Miss Betsey, suddenly, \'91why Rookery?\'92\
\
\'91Do you mean the house, ma\'92am?\'92 asked my mother.\
\
\'91Why Rookery?\'92 said Miss Betsey. \'91Cookery would have been more to the\
purpose, if you had had any practical ideas of life, either of you.\'92\
\
\'91The name was Mr. Copperfield\'92s choice,\'92 returned my mother. \'91When he\
bought the house, he liked to think that there were rooks about it.\'92\
\
The evening wind made such a disturbance just now, among some tall old\
elm-trees at the bottom of the garden, that neither my mother nor Miss\
Betsey could forbear glancing that way. As the elms bent to one another,\
like giants who were whispering secrets, and after a few seconds of such\
repose, fell into a violent flurry, tossing their wild arms about, as if\
their late confidences were really too wicked for their peace of mind,\
some weatherbeaten ragged old rooks\'92-nests, burdening their higher\
branches, swung like wrecks upon a stormy sea.\
\
\'91Where are the birds?\'92 asked Miss Betsey.\
\
\'91The--?\'92 My mother had been thinking of something else.\
\
\'91The rooks--what has become of them?\'92 asked Miss Betsey.\
\
\'91There have not been any since we have lived here,\'92 said my mother. \'91We\
thought--Mr. Copperfield thought--it was quite a large rookery; but\
the nests were very old ones, and the birds have deserted them a long\
while.\'92\
\
\'91David Copperfield all over!\'92 cried Miss Betsey. \'91David Copperfield from\
head to foot! Calls a house a rookery when there\'92s not a rook near it,\
and takes the birds on trust, because he sees the nests!\'92\
\
\'91Mr. Copperfield,\'92 returned my mother, \'91is dead, and if you dare to\
speak unkindly of him to me--\'92\
\
My poor dear mother, I suppose, had some momentary intention of\
committing an assault and battery upon my aunt, who could easily have\
settled her with one hand, even if my mother had been in far better\
training for such an encounter than she was that evening. But it passed\
with the action of rising from her chair; and she sat down again very\
meekly, and fainted.\
\
When she came to herself, or when Miss Betsey had restored her,\
whichever it was, she found the latter standing at the window. The\
twilight was by this time shading down into darkness; and dimly as they\
saw each other, they could not have done that without the aid of the\
fire.\
\
\'91Well?\'92 said Miss Betsey, coming back to her chair, as if she had only\
been taking a casual look at the prospect; \'91and when do you expect--\'92\
\
\'91I am all in a tremble,\'92 faltered my mother. \'91I don\'92t know what\'92s the\
matter. I shall die, I am sure!\'92\
\
\'91No, no, no,\'92 said Miss Betsey. \'91Have some tea.\'92\
\
\'91Oh dear me, dear me, do you think it will do me any good?\'92 cried my\
mother in a helpless manner.\
\
\'91Of course it will,\'92 said Miss Betsey. \'91It\'92s nothing but fancy. What do\
you call your girl?\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know that it will be a girl, yet, ma\'92am,\'92 said my mother\
innocently.\
\
\'91Bless the Baby!\'92 exclaimed Miss Betsey, unconsciously quoting the\
second sentiment of the pincushion in the drawer upstairs, but\
applying it to my mother instead of me, \'91I don\'92t mean that. I mean your\
servant-girl.\'92\
\
\'91Peggotty,\'92 said my mother.\
\
\'91Peggotty!\'92 repeated Miss Betsey, with some indignation. \'91Do you mean to\
say, child, that any human being has gone into a Christian church,\
and got herself named Peggotty?\'92 \'91It\'92s her surname,\'92 said my mother,\
faintly. \'91Mr. Copperfield called her by it, because her Christian name\
was the same as mine.\'92\
\
\'91Here! Peggotty!\'92 cried Miss Betsey, opening the parlour door. \'91Tea.\
Your mistress is a little unwell. Don\'92t dawdle.\'92\
\
Having issued this mandate with as much potentiality as if she had been\
a recognized authority in the house ever since it had been a house,\
and having looked out to confront the amazed Peggotty coming along the\
passage with a candle at the sound of a strange voice, Miss Betsey shut\
the door again, and sat down as before: with her feet on the fender, the\
skirt of her dress tucked up, and her hands folded on one knee.\
\
\'91You were speaking about its being a girl,\'92 said Miss Betsey. \'91I have no\
doubt it will be a girl. I have a presentiment that it must be a girl.\
Now child, from the moment of the birth of this girl--\'92\
\
\'91Perhaps boy,\'92 my mother took the liberty of putting in.\
\
\'91I tell you I have a presentiment that it must be a girl,\'92 returned Miss\
Betsey. \'91Don\'92t contradict. From the moment of this girl\'92s birth, child,\
I intend to be her friend. I intend to be her godmother, and I beg\
you\'92ll call her Betsey Trotwood Copperfield. There must be no mistakes\
in life with THIS Betsey Trotwood. There must be no trifling with HER\
affections, poor dear. She must be well brought up, and well guarded\
from reposing any foolish confidences where they are not deserved. I\
must make that MY care.\'92\
\
There was a twitch of Miss Betsey\'92s head, after each of these sentences,\
as if her own old wrongs were working within her, and she repressed any\
plainer reference to them by strong constraint. So my mother suspected,\
at least, as she observed her by the low glimmer of the fire: too\
much scared by Miss Betsey, too uneasy in herself, and too subdued and\
bewildered altogether, to observe anything very clearly, or to know what\
to say.\
\
\'91And was David good to you, child?\'92 asked Miss Betsey, when she had been\
silent for a little while, and these motions of her head had gradually\
ceased. \'91Were you comfortable together?\'92\
\
\'91We were very happy,\'92 said my mother. \'91Mr. Copperfield was only too good\
to me.\'92\
\
\'91What, he spoilt you, I suppose?\'92 returned Miss Betsey.\
\
\'91For being quite alone and dependent on myself in this rough world\
again, yes, I fear he did indeed,\'92 sobbed my mother.\
\
\'91Well! Don\'92t cry!\'92 said Miss Betsey. \'91You were not equally matched,\
child--if any two people can be equally matched--and so I asked the\
question. You were an orphan, weren\'92t you?\'92 \'91Yes.\'92\
\
\'91And a governess?\'92\
\
\'91I was nursery-governess in a family where Mr. Copperfield came to\
visit. Mr. Copperfield was very kind to me, and took a great deal of\
notice of me, and paid me a good deal of attention, and at last proposed\
to me. And I accepted him. And so we were married,\'92 said my mother\
simply.\
\
\'91Ha! Poor Baby!\'92 mused Miss Betsey, with her frown still bent upon the\
fire. \'91Do you know anything?\'92\
\
\'91I beg your pardon, ma\'92am,\'92 faltered my mother.\
\
\'91About keeping house, for instance,\'92 said Miss Betsey.\
\
\'91Not much, I fear,\'92 returned my mother. \'91Not so much as I could wish.\
But Mr. Copperfield was teaching me--\'92\
\
[\'91Much he knew about it himself!\'92) said Miss Betsey in a parenthesis.\
--\'91And I hope I should have improved, being very anxious to learn, and\
he very patient to teach me, if the great misfortune of his death\'92--my\
mother broke down again here, and could get no farther.\
\
\'91Well, well!\'92 said Miss Betsey. --\'91I kept my housekeeping-book\
regularly, and balanced it with Mr. Copperfield every night,\'92 cried my\
mother in another burst of distress, and breaking down again.\
\
\'91Well, well!\'92 said Miss Betsey. \'91Don\'92t cry any more.\'92 --\'91And I am\
sure we never had a word of difference respecting it, except when Mr.\
Copperfield objected to my threes and fives being too much like each\
other, or to my putting curly tails to my sevens and nines,\'92 resumed my\
mother in another burst, and breaking down again.\
\
\'91You\'92ll make yourself ill,\'92 said Miss Betsey, \'91and you know that will\
not be good either for you or for my god-daughter. Come! You mustn\'92t do\
it!\'92\
\
This argument had some share in quieting my mother, though her\
increasing indisposition had a larger one. There was an interval of\
silence, only broken by Miss Betsey\'92s occasionally ejaculating \'91Ha!\'92 as\
she sat with her feet upon the fender.\
\
\'91David had bought an annuity for himself with his money, I know,\'92 said\
she, by and by. \'91What did he do for you?\'92\
\
\'91Mr. Copperfield,\'92 said my mother, answering with some difficulty, \'91was\
so considerate and good as to secure the reversion of a part of it to\
me.\'92\
\
\'91How much?\'92 asked Miss Betsey.\
\
\'91A hundred and five pounds a year,\'92 said my mother.\
\
\'91He might have done worse,\'92 said my aunt.\
\
The word was appropriate to the moment. My mother was so much worse\
that Peggotty, coming in with the teaboard and candles, and seeing at a\
glance how ill she was,--as Miss Betsey might have done sooner if there\
had been light enough,--conveyed her upstairs to her own room with all\
speed; and immediately dispatched Ham Peggotty, her nephew, who had been\
for some days past secreted in the house, unknown to my mother, as a\
special messenger in case of emergency, to fetch the nurse and doctor.\
\
Those allied powers were considerably astonished, when they arrived\
within a few minutes of each other, to find an unknown lady of\
portentous appearance, sitting before the fire, with her bonnet tied\
over her left arm, stopping her ears with jewellers\'92 cotton. Peggotty\
knowing nothing about her, and my mother saying nothing about her,\
she was quite a mystery in the parlour; and the fact of her having a\
magazine of jewellers\'92 cotton in her pocket, and sticking the article\
in her ears in that way, did not detract from the solemnity of her\
presence.\
\
The doctor having been upstairs and come down again, and having\
satisfied himself, I suppose, that there was a probability of this\
unknown lady and himself having to sit there, face to face, for some\
hours, laid himself out to be polite and social. He was the meekest of\
his sex, the mildest of little men. He sidled in and out of a room, to\
take up the less space. He walked as softly as the Ghost in Hamlet,\
and more slowly. He carried his head on one side, partly in modest\
depreciation of himself, partly in modest propitiation of everybody\
else. It is nothing to say that he hadn\'92t a word to throw at a dog. He\
couldn\'92t have thrown a word at a mad dog. He might have offered him one\
gently, or half a one, or a fragment of one; for he spoke as slowly as\
he walked; but he wouldn\'92t have been rude to him, and he couldn\'92t have\
been quick with him, for any earthly consideration.\
\
Mr. Chillip, looking mildly at my aunt with his head on one side, and\
making her a little bow, said, in allusion to the jewellers\'92 cotton, as\
he softly touched his left ear:\
\
\'91Some local irritation, ma\'92am?\'92\
\
\'91What!\'92 replied my aunt, pulling the cotton out of one ear like a cork.\
\
Mr. Chillip was so alarmed by her abruptness--as he told my mother\
afterwards--that it was a mercy he didn\'92t lose his presence of mind. But\
he repeated sweetly:\
\
\'91Some local irritation, ma\'92am?\'92\
\
\'91Nonsense!\'92 replied my aunt, and corked herself again, at one blow.\
\
Mr. Chillip could do nothing after this, but sit and look at her feebly,\
as she sat and looked at the fire, until he was called upstairs again.\
After some quarter of an hour\'92s absence, he returned.\
\
\'91Well?\'92 said my aunt, taking the cotton out of the ear nearest to him.\
\
\'91Well, ma\'92am,\'92 returned Mr. Chillip, \'91we are--we are progressing slowly,\
ma\'92am.\'92\
\
\'91Ba--a--ah!\'92 said my aunt, with a perfect shake on the contemptuous\
interjection. And corked herself as before.\
\
Really--really--as Mr. Chillip told my mother, he was almost shocked;\
speaking in a professional point of view alone, he was almost shocked.\
But he sat and looked at her, notwithstanding, for nearly two hours,\
as she sat looking at the fire, until he was again called out. After\
another absence, he again returned.\
\
\'91Well?\'92 said my aunt, taking out the cotton on that side again.\
\
\'91Well, ma\'92am,\'92 returned Mr. Chillip, \'91we are--we are progressing slowly,\
ma\'92am.\'92\
\
\'91Ya--a--ah!\'92 said my aunt. With such a snarl at him, that Mr. Chillip\
absolutely could not bear it. It was really calculated to break his\
spirit, he said afterwards. He preferred to go and sit upon the stairs,\
in the dark and a strong draught, until he was again sent for.\
\
Ham Peggotty, who went to the national school, and was a very dragon at\
his catechism, and who may therefore be regarded as a credible witness,\
reported next day, that happening to peep in at the parlour-door an hour\
after this, he was instantly descried by Miss Betsey, then walking to\
and fro in a state of agitation, and pounced upon before he could make\
his escape. That there were now occasional sounds of feet and voices\
overhead which he inferred the cotton did not exclude, from the\
circumstance of his evidently being clutched by the lady as a victim on\
whom to expend her superabundant agitation when the sounds were loudest.\
That, marching him constantly up and down by the collar (as if he had\
been taking too much laudanum), she, at those times, shook him, rumpled\
his hair, made light of his linen, stopped his ears as if she confounded\
them with her own, and otherwise tousled and maltreated him. This was\
in part confirmed by his aunt, who saw him at half past twelve o\'92clock,\
soon after his release, and affirmed that he was then as red as I was.\
\
The mild Mr. Chillip could not possibly bear malice at such a time, if\
at any time. He sidled into the parlour as soon as he was at liberty,\
and said to my aunt in his meekest manner:\
\
\'91Well, ma\'92am, I am happy to congratulate you.\'92\
\
\'91What upon?\'92 said my aunt, sharply.\
\
Mr. Chillip was fluttered again, by the extreme severity of my aunt\'92s\
manner; so he made her a little bow and gave her a little smile, to\
mollify her.\
\
\'91Mercy on the man, what\'92s he doing!\'92 cried my aunt, impatiently. \'91Can\'92t\
he speak?\'92\
\
\'91Be calm, my dear ma\'92am,\'92 said Mr. Chillip, in his softest accents.\
\
\'91There is no longer any occasion for uneasiness, ma\'92am. Be calm.\'92\
\
It has since been considered almost a miracle that my aunt didn\'92t shake\
him, and shake what he had to say, out of him. She only shook her own\
head at him, but in a way that made him quail.\
\
\'91Well, ma\'92am,\'92 resumed Mr. Chillip, as soon as he had courage, \'91I am\
happy to congratulate you. All is now over, ma\'92am, and well over.\'92\
\
During the five minutes or so that Mr. Chillip devoted to the delivery\
of this oration, my aunt eyed him narrowly.\
\
\'91How is she?\'92 said my aunt, folding her arms with her bonnet still tied\
on one of them.\
\
\'91Well, ma\'92am, she will soon be quite comfortable, I hope,\'92 returned Mr.\
Chillip. \'91Quite as comfortable as we can expect a young mother to be,\
under these melancholy domestic circumstances. There cannot be any\
objection to your seeing her presently, ma\'92am. It may do her good.\'92\
\
\'91And SHE. How is SHE?\'92 said my aunt, sharply.\
\
Mr. Chillip laid his head a little more on one side, and looked at my\
aunt like an amiable bird.\
\
\'91The baby,\'92 said my aunt. \'91How is she?\'92\
\
\'91Ma\'92am,\'92 returned Mr. Chillip, \'91I apprehended you had known. It\'92s a\
boy.\'92\
\
My aunt said never a word, but took her bonnet by the strings, in the\
manner of a sling, aimed a blow at Mr. Chillip\'92s head with it, put it on\
bent, walked out, and never came back. She vanished like a discontented\
fairy; or like one of those supernatural beings, whom it was popularly\
supposed I was entitled to see; and never came back any more.\
\
No. I lay in my basket, and my mother lay in her bed; but Betsey\
Trotwood Copperfield was for ever in the land of dreams and shadows, the\
tremendous region whence I had so lately travelled; and the light upon\
the window of our room shone out upon the earthly bourne of all such\
travellers, and the mound above the ashes and the dust that once was he,\
without whom I had never been.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 2. I OBSERVE\
\
\
The first objects that assume a distinct presence before me, as I look\
far back, into the blank of my infancy, are my mother with her pretty\
hair and youthful shape, and Peggotty with no shape at all, and eyes so\
dark that they seemed to darken their whole neighbourhood in her face,\
and cheeks and arms so hard and red that I wondered the birds didn\'92t\
peck her in preference to apples.\
\
I believe I can remember these two at a little distance apart, dwarfed\
to my sight by stooping down or kneeling on the floor, and I going\
unsteadily from the one to the other. I have an impression on my mind\
which I cannot distinguish from actual remembrance, of the touch of\
Peggotty\'92s forefinger as she used to hold it out to me, and of its being\
roughened by needlework, like a pocket nutmeg-grater.\
\
This may be fancy, though I think the memory of most of us can go\
farther back into such times than many of us suppose; just as I believe\
the power of observation in numbers of very young children to be quite\
wonderful for its closeness and accuracy. Indeed, I think that most\
grown men who are remarkable in this respect, may with greater propriety\
be said not to have lost the faculty, than to have acquired it; the\
rather, as I generally observe such men to retain a certain freshness,\
and gentleness, and capacity of being pleased, which are also an\
inheritance they have preserved from their childhood.\
\
I might have a misgiving that I am \'91meandering\'92 in stopping to say this,\
but that it brings me to remark that I build these conclusions, in part\
upon my own experience of myself; and if it should appear from\
anything I may set down in this narrative that I was a child of close\
observation, or that as a man I have a strong memory of my childhood, I\
undoubtedly lay claim to both of these characteristics.\
\
Looking back, as I was saying, into the blank of my infancy, the first\
objects I can remember as standing out by themselves from a confusion of\
things, are my mother and Peggotty. What else do I remember? Let me see.\
\
\
There comes out of the cloud, our house--not new to me, but quite\
familiar, in its earliest remembrance. On the ground-floor is Peggotty\'92s\
kitchen, opening into a back yard; with a pigeon-house on a pole, in\
the centre, without any pigeons in it; a great dog-kennel in a corner,\
without any dog; and a quantity of fowls that look terribly tall to me,\
walking about, in a menacing and ferocious manner. There is one cock who\
gets upon a post to crow, and seems to take particular notice of me as\
I look at him through the kitchen window, who makes me shiver, he is so\
fierce. Of the geese outside the side-gate who come waddling after\
me with their long necks stretched out when I go that way, I dream at\
night: as a man environed by wild beasts might dream of lions.\
\
Here is a long passage--what an enormous perspective I make of\
it!--leading from Peggotty\'92s kitchen to the front door. A dark\
store-room opens out of it, and that is a place to be run past at\
night; for I don\'92t know what may be among those tubs and jars and old\
tea-chests, when there is nobody in there with a dimly-burning light,\
letting a mouldy air come out of the door, in which there is the smell\
of soap, pickles, pepper, candles, and coffee, all at one whiff. Then\
there are the two parlours: the parlour in which we sit of an evening,\
my mother and I and Peggotty--for Peggotty is quite our companion, when\
her work is done and we are alone--and the best parlour where we sit\
on a Sunday; grandly, but not so comfortably. There is something of a\
doleful air about that room to me, for Peggotty has told me--I don\'92t\
know when, but apparently ages ago--about my father\'92s funeral, and the\
company having their black cloaks put on. One Sunday night my mother\
reads to Peggotty and me in there, how Lazarus was raised up from the\
dead. And I am so frightened that they are afterwards obliged to take me\
out of bed, and show me the quiet churchyard out of the bedroom window,\
with the dead all lying in their graves at rest, below the solemn moon.\
\
There is nothing half so green that I know anywhere, as the grass of\
that churchyard; nothing half so shady as its trees; nothing half so\
quiet as its tombstones. The sheep are feeding there, when I kneel up,\
early in the morning, in my little bed in a closet within my mother\'92s\
room, to look out at it; and I see the red light shining on the\
sun-dial, and think within myself, \'91Is the sun-dial glad, I wonder, that\
it can tell the time again?\'92\
\
Here is our pew in the church. What a high-backed pew! With a window\
near it, out of which our house can be seen, and IS seen many times\
during the morning\'92s service, by Peggotty, who likes to make herself\
as sure as she can that it\'92s not being robbed, or is not in flames. But\
though Peggotty\'92s eye wanders, she is much offended if mine does,\
and frowns to me, as I stand upon the seat, that I am to look at the\
clergyman. But I can\'92t always look at him--I know him without that white\
thing on, and I am afraid of his wondering why I stare so, and perhaps\
stopping the service to inquire--and what am I to do? It\'92s a dreadful\
thing to gape, but I must do something. I look at my mother, but she\
pretends not to see me. I look at a boy in the aisle, and he makes faces\
at me. I look at the sunlight coming in at the open door through\
the porch, and there I see a stray sheep--I don\'92t mean a sinner, but\
mutton--half making up his mind to come into the church. I feel that\
if I looked at him any longer, I might be tempted to say something out\
loud; and what would become of me then! I look up at the monumental\
tablets on the wall, and try to think of Mr. Bodgers late of this\
parish, and what the feelings of Mrs. Bodgers must have been, when\
affliction sore, long time Mr. Bodgers bore, and physicians were in\
vain. I wonder whether they called in Mr. Chillip, and he was in vain;\
and if so, how he likes to be reminded of it once a week. I look from\
Mr. Chillip, in his Sunday neckcloth, to the pulpit; and think what a\
good place it would be to play in, and what a castle it would make, with\
another boy coming up the stairs to attack it, and having the velvet\
cushion with the tassels thrown down on his head. In time my eyes\
gradually shut up; and, from seeming to hear the clergyman singing a\
drowsy song in the heat, I hear nothing, until I fall off the seat with\
a crash, and am taken out, more dead than alive, by Peggotty.\
\
And now I see the outside of our house, with the latticed\
bedroom-windows standing open to let in the sweet-smelling air, and the\
ragged old rooks\'92-nests still dangling in the elm-trees at the bottom\
of the front garden. Now I am in the garden at the back, beyond the\
yard where the empty pigeon-house and dog-kennel are--a very preserve\
of butterflies, as I remember it, with a high fence, and a gate and\
padlock; where the fruit clusters on the trees, riper and richer than\
fruit has ever been since, in any other garden, and where my\
mother gathers some in a basket, while I stand by, bolting furtive\
gooseberries, and trying to look unmoved. A great wind rises, and the\
summer is gone in a moment. We are playing in the winter twilight,\
dancing about the parlour. When my mother is out of breath and rests\
herself in an elbow-chair, I watch her winding her bright curls round\
her fingers, and straitening her waist, and nobody knows better than I\
do that she likes to look so well, and is proud of being so pretty.\
\
That is among my very earliest impressions. That, and a sense that we\
were both a little afraid of Peggotty, and submitted ourselves in most\
things to her direction, were among the first opinions--if they may be\
so called--that I ever derived from what I saw.\
\
Peggotty and I were sitting one night by the parlour fire, alone. I\
had been reading to Peggotty about crocodiles. I must have read very\
perspicuously, or the poor soul must have been deeply interested, for I\
remember she had a cloudy impression, after I had done, that they were\
a sort of vegetable. I was tired of reading, and dead sleepy; but\
having leave, as a high treat, to sit up until my mother came home from\
spending the evening at a neighbour\'92s, I would rather have died upon\
my post (of course) than have gone to bed. I had reached that stage of\
sleepiness when Peggotty seemed to swell and grow immensely large.\
I propped my eyelids open with my two forefingers, and looked\
perseveringly at her as she sat at work; at the little bit of wax-candle\
she kept for her thread--how old it looked, being so wrinkled in\
all directions!--at the little house with a thatched roof, where the\
yard-measure lived; at her work-box with a sliding lid, with a view of\
St. Paul\'92s Cathedral (with a pink dome) painted on the top; at the brass\
thimble on her finger; at herself, whom I thought lovely. I felt so\
sleepy, that I knew if I lost sight of anything for a moment, I was\
gone.\
\
\'91Peggotty,\'92 says I, suddenly, \'91were you ever married?\'92\
\
\'91Lord, Master Davy,\'92 replied Peggotty. \'91What\'92s put marriage in your\
head?\'92\
\
She answered with such a start, that it quite awoke me. And then she\
stopped in her work, and looked at me, with her needle drawn out to its\
thread\'92s length.\
\
\'91But WERE you ever married, Peggotty?\'92 says I. \'91You are a very handsome\
woman, an\'92t you?\'92\
\
I thought her in a different style from my mother, certainly; but of\
another school of beauty, I considered her a perfect example. There\
was a red velvet footstool in the best parlour, on which my mother\
had painted a nosegay. The ground-work of that stool, and Peggotty\'92s\
complexion appeared to me to be one and the same thing. The stool was\
smooth, and Peggotty was rough, but that made no difference.\
\
\'91Me handsome, Davy!\'92 said Peggotty. \'91Lawk, no, my dear! But what put\
marriage in your head?\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know!--You mustn\'92t marry more than one person at a time, may\
you, Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91Certainly not,\'92 says Peggotty, with the promptest decision.\
\
\'91But if you marry a person, and the person dies, why then you may marry\
another person, mayn\'92t you, Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91YOU MAY,\'92 says Peggotty, \'91if you choose, my dear. That\'92s a matter of\
opinion.\'92\
\
\'91But what is your opinion, Peggotty?\'92 said I.\
\
I asked her, and looked curiously at her, because she looked so\
curiously at me.\
\
\'91My opinion is,\'92 said Peggotty, taking her eyes from me, after a little\
indecision and going on with her work, \'91that I never was married myself,\
Master Davy, and that I don\'92t expect to be. That\'92s all I know about the\
subject.\'92\
\
\'91You an\'92t cross, I suppose, Peggotty, are you?\'92 said I, after sitting\
quiet for a minute.\
\
I really thought she was, she had been so short with me; but I was quite\
mistaken: for she laid aside her work (which was a stocking of her own),\
and opening her arms wide, took my curly head within them, and gave it\
a good squeeze. I know it was a good squeeze, because, being very plump,\
whenever she made any little exertion after she was dressed, some of the\
buttons on the back of her gown flew off. And I recollect two bursting\
to the opposite side of the parlour, while she was hugging me.\
\
\'91Now let me hear some more about the Crorkindills,\'92 said Peggotty, who\
was not quite right in the name yet, \'91for I an\'92t heard half enough.\'92\
\
I couldn\'92t quite understand why Peggotty looked so queer, or why she\
was so ready to go back to the crocodiles. However, we returned to those\
monsters, with fresh wakefulness on my part, and we left their eggs in\
the sand for the sun to hatch; and we ran away from them, and baffled\
them by constantly turning, which they were unable to do quickly, on\
account of their unwieldy make; and we went into the water after them,\
as natives, and put sharp pieces of timber down their throats; and in\
short we ran the whole crocodile gauntlet. I did, at least; but I had\
my doubts of Peggotty, who was thoughtfully sticking her needle into\
various parts of her face and arms, all the time.\
\
We had exhausted the crocodiles, and begun with the alligators, when\
the garden-bell rang. We went out to the door; and there was my mother,\
looking unusually pretty, I thought, and with her a gentleman with\
beautiful black hair and whiskers, who had walked home with us from\
church last Sunday.\
\
As my mother stooped down on the threshold to take me in her arms and\
kiss me, the gentleman said I was a more highly privileged little fellow\
than a monarch--or something like that; for my later understanding\
comes, I am sensible, to my aid here.\
\
\'91What does that mean?\'92 I asked him, over her shoulder.\
\
He patted me on the head; but somehow, I didn\'92t like him or his deep\
voice, and I was jealous that his hand should touch my mother\'92s in\
touching me--which it did. I put it away, as well as I could.\
\
\'91Oh, Davy!\'92 remonstrated my mother.\
\
\'91Dear boy!\'92 said the gentleman. \'91I cannot wonder at his devotion!\'92\
\
I never saw such a beautiful colour on my mother\'92s face before. She\
gently chid me for being rude; and, keeping me close to her shawl,\
turned to thank the gentleman for taking so much trouble as to bring her\
home. She put out her hand to him as she spoke, and, as he met it with\
his own, she glanced, I thought, at me.\
\
\'91Let us say \'93good night\'94, my fine boy,\'92 said the gentleman, when he had\
bent his head--I saw him!--over my mother\'92s little glove.\
\
\'91Good night!\'92 said I.\
\
\'91Come! Let us be the best friends in the world!\'92 said the gentleman,\
laughing. \'91Shake hands!\'92\
\
My right hand was in my mother\'92s left, so I gave him the other.\
\
\'91Why, that\'92s the Wrong hand, Davy!\'92 laughed the gentleman.\
\
My mother drew my right hand forward, but I was resolved, for my former\
reason, not to give it him, and I did not. I gave him the other, and he\
shook it heartily, and said I was a brave fellow, and went away.\
\
At this minute I see him turn round in the garden, and give us a last\
look with his ill-omened black eyes, before the door was shut.\
\
Peggotty, who had not said a word or moved a finger, secured the\
fastenings instantly, and we all went into the parlour. My mother,\
contrary to her usual habit, instead of coming to the elbow-chair by the\
fire, remained at the other end of the room, and sat singing to herself.\
--\'91Hope you have had a pleasant evening, ma\'92am,\'92 said Peggotty, standing\
as stiff as a barrel in the centre of the room, with a candlestick in\
her hand.\
\
\'91Much obliged to you, Peggotty,\'92 returned my mother, in a cheerful\
voice, \'91I have had a VERY pleasant evening.\'92\
\
\'91A stranger or so makes an agreeable change,\'92 suggested Peggotty.\
\
\'91A very agreeable change, indeed,\'92 returned my mother.\
\
Peggotty continuing to stand motionless in the middle of the room, and\
my mother resuming her singing, I fell asleep, though I was not so sound\
asleep but that I could hear voices, without hearing what they said.\
When I half awoke from this uncomfortable doze, I found Peggotty and my\
mother both in tears, and both talking.\
\
\'91Not such a one as this, Mr. Copperfield wouldn\'92t have liked,\'92 said\
Peggotty. \'91That I say, and that I swear!\'92\
\
\'91Good Heavens!\'92 cried my mother, \'91you\'92ll drive me mad! Was ever any\
poor girl so ill-used by her servants as I am! Why do I do myself\
the injustice of calling myself a girl? Have I never been married,\
Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91God knows you have, ma\'92am,\'92 returned Peggotty. \'91Then, how can you\
dare,\'92 said my mother--\'91you know I don\'92t mean how can you dare,\
Peggotty, but how can you have the heart--to make me so uncomfortable\
and say such bitter things to me, when you are well aware that I\
haven\'92t, out of this place, a single friend to turn to?\'92\
\
\'91The more\'92s the reason,\'92 returned Peggotty, \'91for saying that it won\'92t\
do. No! That it won\'92t do. No! No price could make it do. No!\'92--I thought\
Peggotty would have thrown the candlestick away, she was so emphatic\
with it.\
\
\'91How can you be so aggravating,\'92 said my mother, shedding more tears\
than before, \'91as to talk in such an unjust manner! How can you go on as\
if it was all settled and arranged, Peggotty, when I tell you over\
and over again, you cruel thing, that beyond the commonest civilities\
nothing has passed! You talk of admiration. What am I to do? If people\
are so silly as to indulge the sentiment, is it my fault? What am I to\
do, I ask you? Would you wish me to shave my head and black my face, or\
disfigure myself with a burn, or a scald, or something of that sort? I\
dare say you would, Peggotty. I dare say you\'92d quite enjoy it.\'92\
\
Peggotty seemed to take this aspersion very much to heart, I thought.\
\
\'91And my dear boy,\'92 cried my mother, coming to the elbow-chair in which\
I was, and caressing me, \'91my own little Davy! Is it to be hinted to me\
that I am wanting in affection for my precious treasure, the dearest\
little fellow that ever was!\'92\
\
\'91Nobody never went and hinted no such a thing,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91You did, Peggotty!\'92 returned my mother. \'91You know you did. What else\
was it possible to infer from what you said, you unkind creature,\
when you know as well as I do, that on his account only last quarter I\
wouldn\'92t buy myself a new parasol, though that old green one is frayed\
the whole way up, and the fringe is perfectly mangy? You know it is,\
Peggotty. You can\'92t deny it.\'92 Then, turning affectionately to me, with\
her cheek against mine, \'91Am I a naughty mama to you, Davy? Am I a nasty,\
cruel, selfish, bad mama? Say I am, my child; say \'93yes\'94, dear boy, and\
Peggotty will love you; and Peggotty\'92s love is a great deal better than\
mine, Davy. I don\'92t love you at all, do I?\'92\
\
At this, we all fell a-crying together. I think I was the loudest of\
the party, but I am sure we were all sincere about it. I was quite\
heart-broken myself, and am afraid that in the first transports of\
wounded tenderness I called Peggotty a \'91Beast\'92. That honest creature was\
in deep affliction, I remember, and must have become quite buttonless\
on the occasion; for a little volley of those explosives went off,\
when, after having made it up with my mother, she kneeled down by the\
elbow-chair, and made it up with me.\
\
We went to bed greatly dejected. My sobs kept waking me, for a long\
time; and when one very strong sob quite hoisted me up in bed, I found\
my mother sitting on the coverlet, and leaning over me. I fell asleep in\
her arms, after that, and slept soundly.\
\
Whether it was the following Sunday when I saw the gentleman again,\
or whether there was any greater lapse of time before he reappeared,\
I cannot recall. I don\'92t profess to be clear about dates. But there he\
was, in church, and he walked home with us afterwards. He came in, too,\
to look at a famous geranium we had, in the parlour-window. It did not\
appear to me that he took much notice of it, but before he went he asked\
my mother to give him a bit of the blossom. She begged him to choose it\
for himself, but he refused to do that--I could not understand why--so\
she plucked it for him, and gave it into his hand. He said he would\
never, never part with it any more; and I thought he must be quite a\
fool not to know that it would fall to pieces in a day or two.\
\
Peggotty began to be less with us, of an evening, than she had always\
been. My mother deferred to her very much--more than usual, it occurred\
to me--and we were all three excellent friends; still we were different\
from what we used to be, and were not so comfortable among ourselves.\
Sometimes I fancied that Peggotty perhaps objected to my mother\'92s\
wearing all the pretty dresses she had in her drawers, or to her\
going so often to visit at that neighbour\'92s; but I couldn\'92t, to my\
satisfaction, make out how it was.\
\
Gradually, I became used to seeing the gentleman with the black\
whiskers. I liked him no better than at first, and had the same uneasy\
jealousy of him; but if I had any reason for it beyond a child\'92s\
instinctive dislike, and a general idea that Peggotty and I could make\
much of my mother without any help, it certainly was not THE reason that\
I might have found if I had been older. No such thing came into my mind,\
or near it. I could observe, in little pieces, as it were; but as to\
making a net of a number of these pieces, and catching anybody in it,\
that was, as yet, beyond me.\
\
One autumn morning I was with my mother in the front garden, when Mr.\
Murdstone--I knew him by that name now--came by, on horseback. He reined\
up his horse to salute my mother, and said he was going to Lowestoft to\
see some friends who were there with a yacht, and merrily proposed to\
take me on the saddle before him if I would like the ride.\
\
The air was so clear and pleasant, and the horse seemed to like the\
idea of the ride so much himself, as he stood snorting and pawing at the\
garden-gate, that I had a great desire to go. So I was sent upstairs\
to Peggotty to be made spruce; and in the meantime Mr. Murdstone\
dismounted, and, with his horse\'92s bridle drawn over his arm, walked\
slowly up and down on the outer side of the sweetbriar fence, while my\
mother walked slowly up and down on the inner to keep him company. I\
recollect Peggotty and I peeping out at them from my little window; I\
recollect how closely they seemed to be examining the sweetbriar between\
them, as they strolled along; and how, from being in a perfectly angelic\
temper, Peggotty turned cross in a moment, and brushed my hair the wrong\
way, excessively hard.\
\
Mr. Murdstone and I were soon off, and trotting along on the green turf\
by the side of the road. He held me quite easily with one arm, and I\
don\'92t think I was restless usually; but I could not make up my mind to\
sit in front of him without turning my head sometimes, and looking up in\
his face. He had that kind of shallow black eye--I want a better word to\
express an eye that has no depth in it to be looked into--which, when\
it is abstracted, seems from some peculiarity of light to be disfigured,\
for a moment at a time, by a cast. Several times when I glanced at him,\
I observed that appearance with a sort of awe, and wondered what he\
was thinking about so closely. His hair and whiskers were blacker and\
thicker, looked at so near, than even I had given them credit for being.\
A squareness about the lower part of his face, and the dotted indication\
of the strong black beard he shaved close every day, reminded me of\
the wax-work that had travelled into our neighbourhood some half-a-year\
before. This, his regular eyebrows, and the rich white, and black, and\
brown, of his complexion--confound his complexion, and his memory!--made\
me think him, in spite of my misgivings, a very handsome man. I have no\
doubt that my poor dear mother thought him so too.\
\
We went to an hotel by the sea, where two gentlemen were smoking cigars\
in a room by themselves. Each of them was lying on at least four chairs,\
and had a large rough jacket on. In a corner was a heap of coats and\
boat-cloaks, and a flag, all bundled up together.\
\
They both rolled on to their feet in an untidy sort of manner, when we\
came in, and said, \'91Halloa, Murdstone! We thought you were dead!\'92\
\
\'91Not yet,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone.\
\
\'91And who\'92s this shaver?\'92 said one of the gentlemen, taking hold of me.\
\
\'91That\'92s Davy,\'92 returned Mr. Murdstone.\
\
\'91Davy who?\'92 said the gentleman. \'91Jones?\'92\
\
\'91Copperfield,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone.\
\
\'91What! Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield\'92s encumbrance?\'92 cried the gentleman.\
\'91The pretty little widow?\'92\
\
\'91Quinion,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, \'91take care, if you please. Somebody\'92s\
sharp.\'92\
\
\'91Who is?\'92 asked the gentleman, laughing. I looked up, quickly; being\
curious to know.\
\
\'91Only Brooks of Sheffield,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone.\
\
I was quite relieved to find that it was only Brooks of Sheffield; for,\
at first, I really thought it was I.\
\
There seemed to be something very comical in the reputation of Mr.\
Brooks of Sheffield, for both the gentlemen laughed heartily when he\
was mentioned, and Mr. Murdstone was a good deal amused also. After some\
laughing, the gentleman whom he had called Quinion, said:\
\
\'91And what is the opinion of Brooks of Sheffield, in reference to the\
projected business?\'92\
\
\'91Why, I don\'92t know that Brooks understands much about it at present,\'92\
replied Mr. Murdstone; \'91but he is not generally favourable, I believe.\'92\
\
There was more laughter at this, and Mr. Quinion said he would ring the\
bell for some sherry in which to drink to Brooks. This he did; and when\
the wine came, he made me have a little, with a biscuit, and, before\
I drank it, stand up and say, \'91Confusion to Brooks of Sheffield!\'92 The\
toast was received with great applause, and such hearty laughter that\
it made me laugh too; at which they laughed the more. In short, we quite\
enjoyed ourselves.\
\
We walked about on the cliff after that, and sat on the grass, and\
looked at things through a telescope--I could make out nothing myself\
when it was put to my eye, but I pretended I could--and then we came\
back to the hotel to an early dinner. All the time we were out, the two\
gentlemen smoked incessantly--which, I thought, if I might judge from\
the smell of their rough coats, they must have been doing, ever since\
the coats had first come home from the tailor\'92s. I must not forget that\
we went on board the yacht, where they all three descended into the\
cabin, and were busy with some papers. I saw them quite hard at work,\
when I looked down through the open skylight. They left me, during this\
time, with a very nice man with a very large head of red hair and a very\
small shiny hat upon it, who had got a cross-barred shirt or waistcoat\
on, with \'91Skylark\'92 in capital letters across the chest. I thought it was\
his name; and that as he lived on board ship and hadn\'92t a street door\
to put his name on, he put it there instead; but when I called him Mr.\
Skylark, he said it meant the vessel.\
\
I observed all day that Mr. Murdstone was graver and steadier than the\
two gentlemen. They were very gay and careless. They joked freely with\
one another, but seldom with him. It appeared to me that he was\
more clever and cold than they were, and that they regarded him with\
something of my own feeling. I remarked that, once or twice when Mr.\
Quinion was talking, he looked at Mr. Murdstone sideways, as if to make\
sure of his not being displeased; and that once when Mr. Passnidge (the\
other gentleman) was in high spirits, he trod upon his foot, and gave\
him a secret caution with his eyes, to observe Mr. Murdstone, who was\
sitting stern and silent. Nor do I recollect that Mr. Murdstone laughed\
at all that day, except at the Sheffield joke--and that, by the by, was\
his own.\
\
We went home early in the evening. It was a very fine evening, and my\
mother and he had another stroll by the sweetbriar, while I was sent in\
to get my tea. When he was gone, my mother asked me all about the day I\
had had, and what they had said and done. I mentioned what they had said\
about her, and she laughed, and told me they were impudent fellows who\
talked nonsense--but I knew it pleased her. I knew it quite as well as\
I know it now. I took the opportunity of asking if she was at all\
acquainted with Mr. Brooks of Sheffield, but she answered No, only she\
supposed he must be a manufacturer in the knife and fork way.\
\
Can I say of her face--altered as I have reason to remember it, perished\
as I know it is--that it is gone, when here it comes before me at this\
instant, as distinct as any face that I may choose to look on in a\
crowded street? Can I say of her innocent and girlish beauty, that it\
faded, and was no more, when its breath falls on my cheek now, as it\
fell that night? Can I say she ever changed, when my remembrance brings\
her back to life, thus only; and, truer to its loving youth than I have\
been, or man ever is, still holds fast what it cherished then?\
\
I write of her just as she was when I had gone to bed after this talk,\
and she came to bid me good night. She kneeled down playfully by the\
side of the bed, and laying her chin upon her hands, and laughing, said:\
\
\'91What was it they said, Davy? Tell me again. I can\'92t believe it.\'92\
\
\'91\'93Bewitching--\'93\'92 I began.\
\
My mother put her hands upon my lips to stop me.\
\
\'91It was never bewitching,\'92 she said, laughing. \'91It never could have been\
bewitching, Davy. Now I know it wasn\'92t!\'92\
\
\'91Yes, it was. \'93Bewitching Mrs. Copperfield\'94,\'92 I repeated stoutly. \'91And,\
\'93pretty.\'94\'92\
\
\'91No, no, it was never pretty. Not pretty,\'92 interposed my mother, laying\
her fingers on my lips again.\
\
\'91Yes it was. \'93Pretty little widow.\'94\'92\
\
\'91What foolish, impudent creatures!\'92 cried my mother, laughing and\
covering her face. \'91What ridiculous men! An\'92t they? Davy dear--\'92\
\
\'91Well, Ma.\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t tell Peggotty; she might be angry with them. I am dreadfully\
angry with them myself; but I would rather Peggotty didn\'92t know.\'92\
\
I promised, of course; and we kissed one another over and over again,\
and I soon fell fast asleep.\
\
It seems to me, at this distance of time, as if it were the next day\
when Peggotty broached the striking and adventurous proposition I am\
about to mention; but it was probably about two months afterwards.\
\
We were sitting as before, one evening (when my mother was out as\
before), in company with the stocking and the yard-measure, and the bit\
of wax, and the box with St. Paul\'92s on the lid, and the crocodile book,\
when Peggotty, after looking at me several times, and opening her mouth\
as if she were going to speak, without doing it--which I thought was\
merely gaping, or I should have been rather alarmed--said coaxingly:\
\
\'91Master Davy, how should you like to go along with me and spend a\
fortnight at my brother\'92s at Yarmouth? Wouldn\'92t that be a treat?\'92\
\
\'91Is your brother an agreeable man, Peggotty?\'92 I inquired, provisionally.\
\
\'91Oh, what an agreeable man he is!\'92 cried Peggotty, holding up her hands.\
\'91Then there\'92s the sea; and the boats and ships; and the fishermen; and\
the beach; and Am to play with--\'92\
\
Peggotty meant her nephew Ham, mentioned in my first chapter; but she\
spoke of him as a morsel of English Grammar.\
\
I was flushed by her summary of delights, and replied that it would\
indeed be a treat, but what would my mother say?\
\
\'91Why then I\'92ll as good as bet a guinea,\'92 said Peggotty, intent upon my\
face, \'91that she\'92ll let us go. I\'92ll ask her, if you like, as soon as ever\
she comes home. There now!\'92\
\
\'91But what\'92s she to do while we\'92re away?\'92 said I, putting my small elbows\
on the table to argue the point. \'91She can\'92t live by herself.\'92\
\
If Peggotty were looking for a hole, all of a sudden, in the heel of\
that stocking, it must have been a very little one indeed, and not worth\
darning.\
\
\'91I say! Peggotty! She can\'92t live by herself, you know.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, bless you!\'92 said Peggotty, looking at me again at last. \'91Don\'92t\
you know? She\'92s going to stay for a fortnight with Mrs. Grayper. Mrs.\
Grayper\'92s going to have a lot of company.\'92\
\
Oh! If that was it, I was quite ready to go. I waited, in the utmost\
impatience, until my mother came home from Mrs. Grayper\'92s (for it was\
that identical neighbour), to ascertain if we could get leave to carry\
out this great idea. Without being nearly so much surprised as I had\
expected, my mother entered into it readily; and it was all arranged\
that night, and my board and lodging during the visit were to be paid\
for.\
\
The day soon came for our going. It was such an early day that it came\
soon, even to me, who was in a fever of expectation, and half afraid\
that an earthquake or a fiery mountain, or some other great convulsion\
of nature, might interpose to stop the expedition. We were to go in a\
carrier\'92s cart, which departed in the morning after breakfast. I would\
have given any money to have been allowed to wrap myself up over-night,\
and sleep in my hat and boots.\
\
It touches me nearly now, although I tell it lightly, to recollect how\
eager I was to leave my happy home; to think how little I suspected what\
I did leave for ever.\
\
I am glad to recollect that when the carrier\'92s cart was at the gate, and\
my mother stood there kissing me, a grateful fondness for her and for\
the old place I had never turned my back upon before, made me cry. I am\
glad to know that my mother cried too, and that I felt her heart beat\
against mine.\
\
I am glad to recollect that when the carrier began to move, my mother\
ran out at the gate, and called to him to stop, that she might kiss me\
once more. I am glad to dwell upon the earnestness and love with which\
she lifted up her face to mine, and did so.\
\
As we left her standing in the road, Mr. Murdstone came up to where\
she was, and seemed to expostulate with her for being so moved. I was\
looking back round the awning of the cart, and wondered what business\
it was of his. Peggotty, who was also looking back on the other side,\
seemed anything but satisfied; as the face she brought back in the cart\
denoted.\
\
I sat looking at Peggotty for some time, in a reverie on this\
supposititious case: whether, if she were employed to lose me like the\
boy in the fairy tale, I should be able to track my way home again by\
the buttons she would shed.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 3. I HAVE A CHANGE\
\
\
The carrier\'92s horse was the laziest horse in the world, I should hope,\
and shuffled along, with his head down, as if he liked to keep people\
waiting to whom the packages were directed. I fancied, indeed, that he\
sometimes chuckled audibly over this reflection, but the carrier said\
he was only troubled with a cough. The carrier had a way of keeping his\
head down, like his horse, and of drooping sleepily forward as he drove,\
with one of his arms on each of his knees. I say \'91drove\'92, but it struck\
me that the cart would have gone to Yarmouth quite as well without him,\
for the horse did all that; and as to conversation, he had no idea of it\
but whistling.\
\
Peggotty had a basket of refreshments on her knee, which would have\
lasted us out handsomely, if we had been going to London by the same\
conveyance. We ate a good deal, and slept a good deal. Peggotty always\
went to sleep with her chin upon the handle of the basket, her hold of\
which never relaxed; and I could not have believed unless I had heard\
her do it, that one defenceless woman could have snored so much.\
\
We made so many deviations up and down lanes, and were such a long time\
delivering a bedstead at a public-house, and calling at other places,\
that I was quite tired, and very glad, when we saw Yarmouth. It looked\
rather spongy and soppy, I thought, as I carried my eye over the great\
dull waste that lay across the river; and I could not help wondering, if\
the world were really as round as my geography book said, how any\
part of it came to be so flat. But I reflected that Yarmouth might be\
situated at one of the poles; which would account for it.\
\
As we drew a little nearer, and saw the whole adjacent prospect lying a\
straight low line under the sky, I hinted to Peggotty that a mound or so\
might have improved it; and also that if the land had been a little more\
separated from the sea, and the town and the tide had not been quite\
so much mixed up, like toast and water, it would have been nicer. But\
Peggotty said, with greater emphasis than usual, that we must take\
things as we found them, and that, for her part, she was proud to call\
herself a Yarmouth Bloater.\
\
When we got into the street (which was strange enough to me) and smelt\
the fish, and pitch, and oakum, and tar, and saw the sailors walking\
about, and the carts jingling up and down over the stones, I felt that I\
had done so busy a place an injustice; and said as much to Peggotty, who\
heard my expressions of delight with great complacency, and told me it\
was well known (I suppose to those who had the good fortune to be born\
Bloaters) that Yarmouth was, upon the whole, the finest place in the\
universe.\
\
\'91Here\'92s my Am!\'92 screamed Peggotty, \'91growed out of knowledge!\'92\
\
He was waiting for us, in fact, at the public-house; and asked me how I\
found myself, like an old acquaintance. I did not feel, at first, that\
I knew him as well as he knew me, because he had never come to our house\
since the night I was born, and naturally he had the advantage of me.\
But our intimacy was much advanced by his taking me on his back to carry\
me home. He was, now, a huge, strong fellow of six feet high, broad in\
proportion, and round-shouldered; but with a simpering boy\'92s face and\
curly light hair that gave him quite a sheepish look. He was dressed in\
a canvas jacket, and a pair of such very stiff trousers that they\
would have stood quite as well alone, without any legs in them. And you\
couldn\'92t so properly have said he wore a hat, as that he was covered in\
a-top, like an old building, with something pitchy.\
\
Ham carrying me on his back and a small box of ours under his arm,\
and Peggotty carrying another small box of ours, we turned down lanes\
bestrewn with bits of chips and little hillocks of sand, and went\
past gas-works, rope-walks, boat-builders\'92 yards, shipwrights\'92 yards,\
ship-breakers\'92 yards, caulkers\'92 yards, riggers\'92 lofts, smiths\'92 forges,\
and a great litter of such places, until we came out upon the dull waste\
I had already seen at a distance; when Ham said,\
\
\'91Yon\'92s our house, Mas\'92r Davy!\'92\
\
I looked in all directions, as far as I could stare over the wilderness,\
and away at the sea, and away at the river, but no house could I make\
out. There was a black barge, or some other kind of superannuated boat,\
not far off, high and dry on the ground, with an iron funnel sticking\
out of it for a chimney and smoking very cosily; but nothing else in the\
way of a habitation that was visible to me.\
\
\'91That\'92s not it?\'92 said I. \'91That ship-looking thing?\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s it, Mas\'92r Davy,\'92 returned Ham.\
\
If it had been Aladdin\'92s palace, roc\'92s egg and all, I suppose I could\
not have been more charmed with the romantic idea of living in it. There\
was a delightful door cut in the side, and it was roofed in, and there\
were little windows in it; but the wonderful charm of it was, that\
it was a real boat which had no doubt been upon the water hundreds of\
times, and which had never been intended to be lived in, on dry land.\
That was the captivation of it to me. If it had ever been meant to be\
lived in, I might have thought it small, or inconvenient, or lonely; but\
never having been designed for any such use, it became a perfect abode.\
\
It was beautifully clean inside, and as tidy as possible. There was a\
table, and a Dutch clock, and a chest of drawers, and on the chest of\
drawers there was a tea-tray with a painting on it of a lady with a\
parasol, taking a walk with a military-looking child who was trundling a\
hoop. The tray was kept from tumbling down, by a bible; and the tray, if\
it had tumbled down, would have smashed a quantity of cups and saucers\
and a teapot that were grouped around the book. On the walls there were\
some common coloured pictures, framed and glazed, of scripture subjects;\
such as I have never seen since in the hands of pedlars, without seeing\
the whole interior of Peggotty\'92s brother\'92s house again, at one view.\
Abraham in red going to sacrifice Isaac in blue, and Daniel in yellow\
cast into a den of green lions, were the most prominent of these. Over\
the little mantelshelf, was a picture of the \'91Sarah Jane\'92 lugger, built\
at Sunderland, with a real little wooden stern stuck on to it; a work of\
art, combining composition with carpentry, which I considered to be one\
of the most enviable possessions that the world could afford. There\
were some hooks in the beams of the ceiling, the use of which I did not\
divine then; and some lockers and boxes and conveniences of that sort,\
which served for seats and eked out the chairs.\
\
All this I saw in the first glance after I crossed the\
threshold--child-like, according to my theory--and then Peggotty opened\
a little door and showed me my bedroom. It was the completest and most\
desirable bedroom ever seen--in the stern of the vessel; with a little\
window, where the rudder used to go through; a little looking-glass,\
just the right height for me, nailed against the wall, and framed with\
oyster-shells; a little bed, which there was just room enough to get\
into; and a nosegay of seaweed in a blue mug on the table. The walls\
were whitewashed as white as milk, and the patchwork counterpane made my\
eyes quite ache with its brightness. One thing I particularly noticed\
in this delightful house, was the smell of fish; which was so searching,\
that when I took out my pocket-handkerchief to wipe my nose, I found it\
smelt exactly as if it had wrapped up a lobster. On my imparting this\
discovery in confidence to Peggotty, she informed me that her brother\
dealt in lobsters, crabs, and crawfish; and I afterwards found that a\
heap of these creatures, in a state of wonderful conglomeration with one\
another, and never leaving off pinching whatever they laid hold of,\
were usually to be found in a little wooden outhouse where the pots and\
kettles were kept.\
\
We were welcomed by a very civil woman in a white apron, whom I had seen\
curtseying at the door when I was on Ham\'92s back, about a quarter of a\
mile off. Likewise by a most beautiful little girl (or I thought her so)\
with a necklace of blue beads on, who wouldn\'92t let me kiss her when I\
offered to, but ran away and hid herself. By and by, when we had dined\
in a sumptuous manner off boiled dabs, melted butter, and potatoes, with\
a chop for me, a hairy man with a very good-natured face came home. As\
he called Peggotty \'91Lass\'92, and gave her a hearty smack on the cheek, I\
had no doubt, from the general propriety of her conduct, that he was her\
brother; and so he turned out--being presently introduced to me as Mr.\
Peggotty, the master of the house.\
\
\'91Glad to see you, sir,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty. \'91You\'92ll find us rough, sir,\
but you\'92ll find us ready.\'92\
\
I thanked him, and replied that I was sure I should be happy in such a\
delightful place.\
\
\'91How\'92s your Ma, sir?\'92 said Mr. Peggotty. \'91Did you leave her pretty\
jolly?\'92\
\
I gave Mr. Peggotty to understand that she was as jolly as I could wish,\
and that she desired her compliments--which was a polite fiction on my\
part.\
\
\'91I\'92m much obleeged to her, I\'92m sure,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty. \'91Well, sir,\
if you can make out here, fur a fortnut, \'91long wi\'92 her,\'92 nodding at his\
sister, \'91and Ham, and little Em\'92ly, we shall be proud of your company.\'92\
\
Having done the honours of his house in this hospitable manner, Mr.\
Peggotty went out to wash himself in a kettleful of hot water, remarking\
that \'91cold would never get his muck off\'92. He soon returned, greatly\
improved in appearance; but so rubicund, that I couldn\'92t help\
thinking his face had this in common with the lobsters, crabs, and\
crawfish,--that it went into the hot water very black, and came out very\
red.\
\
After tea, when the door was shut and all was made snug (the nights\
being cold and misty now), it seemed to me the most delicious retreat\
that the imagination of man could conceive. To hear the wind getting\
up out at sea, to know that the fog was creeping over the desolate flat\
outside, and to look at the fire, and think that there was no house near\
but this one, and this one a boat, was like enchantment. Little Em\'92ly\
had overcome her shyness, and was sitting by my side upon the lowest and\
least of the lockers, which was just large enough for us two, and just\
fitted into the chimney corner. Mrs. Peggotty with the white apron, was\
knitting on the opposite side of the fire. Peggotty at her needlework\
was as much at home with St. Paul\'92s and the bit of wax-candle, as if\
they had never known any other roof. Ham, who had been giving me my\
first lesson in all-fours, was trying to recollect a scheme of telling\
fortunes with the dirty cards, and was printing off fishy impressions of\
his thumb on all the cards he turned. Mr. Peggotty was smoking his pipe.\
I felt it was a time for conversation and confidence.\
\
\'91Mr. Peggotty!\'92 says I.\
\
\'91Sir,\'92 says he.\
\
\'91Did you give your son the name of Ham, because you lived in a sort of\
ark?\'92\
\
Mr. Peggotty seemed to think it a deep idea, but answered:\
\
\'91No, sir. I never giv him no name.\'92\
\
\'91Who gave him that name, then?\'92 said I, putting question number two of\
the catechism to Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91Why, sir, his father giv it him,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91I thought you were his father!\'92\
\
\'91My brother Joe was his father,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91Dead, Mr. Peggotty?\'92 I hinted, after a respectful pause.\
\
\'91Drowndead,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
I was very much surprised that Mr. Peggotty was not Ham\'92s father, and\
began to wonder whether I was mistaken about his relationship to anybody\
else there. I was so curious to know, that I made up my mind to have it\
out with Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91Little Em\'92ly,\'92 I said, glancing at her. \'91She is your daughter, isn\'92t\
she, Mr. Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91No, sir. My brother-in-law, Tom, was her father.\'92\
\
I couldn\'92t help it. \'91--Dead, Mr. Peggotty?\'92 I hinted, after another\
respectful silence.\
\
\'91Drowndead,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
I felt the difficulty of resuming the subject, but had not got to the\
bottom of it yet, and must get to the bottom somehow. So I said:\
\
\'91Haven\'92t you ANY children, Mr. Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91No, master,\'92 he answered with a short laugh. \'91I\'92m a bacheldore.\'92\
\
\'91A bachelor!\'92 I said, astonished. \'91Why, who\'92s that, Mr. Peggotty?\'92\
pointing to the person in the apron who was knitting.\
\
\'91That\'92s Missis Gummidge,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91Gummidge, Mr. Peggotty?\'92\
\
But at this point Peggotty--I mean my own peculiar Peggotty--made such\
impressive motions to me not to ask any more questions, that I could\
only sit and look at all the silent company, until it was time to go to\
bed. Then, in the privacy of my own little cabin, she informed me that\
Ham and Em\'92ly were an orphan nephew and niece, whom my host had\
at different times adopted in their childhood, when they were left\
destitute: and that Mrs. Gummidge was the widow of his partner in\
a boat, who had died very poor. He was but a poor man himself, said\
Peggotty, but as good as gold and as true as steel--those were her\
similes. The only subject, she informed me, on which he ever showed a\
violent temper or swore an oath, was this generosity of his; and if it\
were ever referred to, by any one of them, he struck the table a heavy\
blow with his right hand (had split it on one such occasion), and swore\
a dreadful oath that he would be \'91Gormed\'92 if he didn\'92t cut and run\
for good, if it was ever mentioned again. It appeared, in answer to\
my inquiries, that nobody had the least idea of the etymology of this\
terrible verb passive to be gormed; but that they all regarded it as\
constituting a most solemn imprecation.\
\
I was very sensible of my entertainer\'92s goodness, and listened to the\
women\'92s going to bed in another little crib like mine at the opposite\
end of the boat, and to him and Ham hanging up two hammocks for\
themselves on the hooks I had noticed in the roof, in a very luxurious\
state of mind, enhanced by my being sleepy. As slumber gradually stole\
upon me, I heard the wind howling out at sea and coming on across the\
flat so fiercely, that I had a lazy apprehension of the great deep\
rising in the night. But I bethought myself that I was in a boat, after\
all; and that a man like Mr. Peggotty was not a bad person to have on\
board if anything did happen.\
\
Nothing happened, however, worse than morning. Almost as soon as it\
shone upon the oyster-shell frame of my mirror I was out of bed, and out\
with little Em\'92ly, picking up stones upon the beach.\
\
\'91You\'92re quite a sailor, I suppose?\'92 I said to Em\'92ly. I don\'92t know that I\
supposed anything of the kind, but I felt it an act of gallantry to\
say something; and a shining sail close to us made such a pretty little\
image of itself, at the moment, in her bright eye, that it came into my\
head to say this.\
\
\'91No,\'92 replied Em\'92ly, shaking her head, \'91I\'92m afraid of the sea.\'92\
\
\'91Afraid!\'92 I said, with a becoming air of boldness, and looking very big\
at the mighty ocean. \'91I an\'92t!\'92\
\
\'91Ah! but it\'92s cruel,\'92 said Em\'92ly. \'91I have seen it very cruel to some of\
our men. I have seen it tear a boat as big as our house, all to pieces.\'92\
\
\'91I hope it wasn\'92t the boat that--\'92\
\
\'91That father was drownded in?\'92 said Em\'92ly. \'91No. Not that one, I never\
see that boat.\'92\
\
\'91Nor him?\'92 I asked her.\
\
Little Em\'92ly shook her head. \'91Not to remember!\'92\
\
Here was a coincidence! I immediately went into an explanation how I had\
never seen my own father; and how my mother and I had always lived\
by ourselves in the happiest state imaginable, and lived so then, and\
always meant to live so; and how my father\'92s grave was in the churchyard\
near our house, and shaded by a tree, beneath the boughs of which I had\
walked and heard the birds sing many a pleasant morning. But there were\
some differences between Em\'92ly\'92s orphanhood and mine, it appeared. She\
had lost her mother before her father; and where her father\'92s grave was\
no one knew, except that it was somewhere in the depths of the sea.\
\
\'91Besides,\'92 said Em\'92ly, as she looked about for shells and pebbles, \'91your\
father was a gentleman and your mother is a lady; and my father was a\
fisherman and my mother was a fisherman\'92s daughter, and my uncle Dan is\
a fisherman.\'92\
\
\'91Dan is Mr. Peggotty, is he?\'92 said I.\
\
\'91Uncle Dan--yonder,\'92 answered Em\'92ly, nodding at the boat-house.\
\
\'91Yes. I mean him. He must be very good, I should think?\'92\
\
\'91Good?\'92 said Em\'92ly. \'91If I was ever to be a lady, I\'92d give him a sky-blue\
coat with diamond buttons, nankeen trousers, a red velvet waistcoat, a\
cocked hat, a large gold watch, a silver pipe, and a box of money.\'92\
\
I said I had no doubt that Mr. Peggotty well deserved these treasures.\
I must acknowledge that I felt it difficult to picture him quite at his\
ease in the raiment proposed for him by his grateful little niece, and\
that I was particularly doubtful of the policy of the cocked hat; but I\
kept these sentiments to myself.\
\
Little Em\'92ly had stopped and looked up at the sky in her enumeration\
of these articles, as if they were a glorious vision. We went on again,\
picking up shells and pebbles.\
\
\'91You would like to be a lady?\'92 I said.\
\
Emily looked at me, and laughed and nodded \'91yes\'92.\
\
\'91I should like it very much. We would all be gentlefolks together, then.\
Me, and uncle, and Ham, and Mrs. Gummidge. We wouldn\'92t mind then, when\
there comes stormy weather.---Not for our own sakes, I mean. We would\
for the poor fishermen\'92s, to be sure, and we\'92d help \'91em with money when\
they come to any hurt.\'92 This seemed to me to be a very satisfactory and\
therefore not at all improbable picture. I expressed my pleasure in the\
contemplation of it, and little Em\'92ly was emboldened to say, shyly,\
\
\'91Don\'92t you think you are afraid of the sea, now?\'92\
\
It was quiet enough to reassure me, but I have no doubt if I had seen a\
moderately large wave come tumbling in, I should have taken to my heels,\
with an awful recollection of her drowned relations. However, I said\
\'91No,\'92 and I added, \'91You don\'92t seem to be either, though you say you\
are,\'92--for she was walking much too near the brink of a sort of old\
jetty or wooden causeway we had strolled upon, and I was afraid of her\
falling over.\
\
\'91I\'92m not afraid in this way,\'92 said little Em\'92ly. \'91But I wake when it\
blows, and tremble to think of Uncle Dan and Ham and believe I hear \'91em\
crying out for help. That\'92s why I should like so much to be a lady. But\
I\'92m not afraid in this way. Not a bit. Look here!\'92\
\
She started from my side, and ran along a jagged timber which protruded\
from the place we stood upon, and overhung the deep water at some\
height, without the least defence. The incident is so impressed on my\
remembrance, that if I were a draughtsman I could draw its form here,\
I dare say, accurately as it was that day, and little Em\'92ly springing\
forward to her destruction (as it appeared to me), with a look that I\
have never forgotten, directed far out to sea.\
\
The light, bold, fluttering little figure turned and came back safe\
to me, and I soon laughed at my fears, and at the cry I had uttered;\
fruitlessly in any case, for there was no one near. But there have been\
times since, in my manhood, many times there have been, when I have\
thought, Is it possible, among the possibilities of hidden things, that\
in the sudden rashness of the child and her wild look so far off, there\
was any merciful attraction of her into danger, any tempting her towards\
him permitted on the part of her dead father, that her life might have\
a chance of ending that day? There has been a time since when I have\
wondered whether, if the life before her could have been revealed to me\
at a glance, and so revealed as that a child could fully comprehend it,\
and if her preservation could have depended on a motion of my hand, I\
ought to have held it up to save her. There has been a time since--I do\
not say it lasted long, but it has been--when I have asked myself the\
question, would it have been better for little Em\'92ly to have had the\
waters close above her head that morning in my sight; and when I have\
answered Yes, it would have been.\
\
This may be premature. I have set it down too soon, perhaps. But let it\
stand.\
\
We strolled a long way, and loaded ourselves with things that we thought\
curious, and put some stranded starfish carefully back into the water--I\
hardly know enough of the race at this moment to be quite certain\
whether they had reason to feel obliged to us for doing so, or the\
reverse--and then made our way home to Mr. Peggotty\'92s dwelling. We\
stopped under the lee of the lobster-outhouse to exchange an innocent\
kiss, and went in to breakfast glowing with health and pleasure.\
\
\'91Like two young mavishes,\'92 Mr. Peggotty said. I knew this meant, in our\
local dialect, like two young thrushes, and received it as a compliment.\
\
Of course I was in love with little Em\'92ly. I am sure I loved that\
baby quite as truly, quite as tenderly, with greater purity and more\
disinterestedness, than can enter into the best love of a later time\
of life, high and ennobling as it is. I am sure my fancy raised up\
something round that blue-eyed mite of a child, which etherealized,\
and made a very angel of her. If, any sunny forenoon, she had spread\
a little pair of wings and flown away before my eyes, I don\'92t think I\
should have regarded it as much more than I had had reason to expect.\
\
We used to walk about that dim old flat at Yarmouth in a loving manner,\
hours and hours. The days sported by us, as if Time had not grown up\
himself yet, but were a child too, and always at play. I told Em\'92ly\
I adored her, and that unless she confessed she adored me I should be\
reduced to the necessity of killing myself with a sword. She said she\
did, and I have no doubt she did.\
\
As to any sense of inequality, or youthfulness, or other difficulty\
in our way, little Em\'92ly and I had no such trouble, because we had no\
future. We made no more provision for growing older, than we did for\
growing younger. We were the admiration of Mrs. Gummidge and Peggotty,\
who used to whisper of an evening when we sat, lovingly, on our little\
locker side by side, \'91Lor! wasn\'92t it beautiful!\'92 Mr. Peggotty smiled at\
us from behind his pipe, and Ham grinned all the evening and did nothing\
else. They had something of the sort of pleasure in us, I suppose, that\
they might have had in a pretty toy, or a pocket model of the Colosseum.\
\
I soon found out that Mrs. Gummidge did not always make herself so\
agreeable as she might have been expected to do, under the circumstances\
of her residence with Mr. Peggotty. Mrs. Gummidge\'92s was rather a fretful\
disposition, and she whimpered more sometimes than was comfortable for\
other parties in so small an establishment. I was very sorry for\
her; but there were moments when it would have been more agreeable, I\
thought, if Mrs. Gummidge had had a convenient apartment of her own to\
retire to, and had stopped there until her spirits revived.\
\
Mr. Peggotty went occasionally to a public-house called The Willing\
Mind. I discovered this, by his being out on the second or third evening\
of our visit, and by Mrs. Gummidge\'92s looking up at the Dutch clock,\
between eight and nine, and saying he was there, and that, what was\
more, she had known in the morning he would go there.\
\
Mrs. Gummidge had been in a low state all day, and had burst into tears\
in the forenoon, when the fire smoked. \'91I am a lone lorn creetur\'92,\'92 were\
Mrs. Gummidge\'92s words, when that unpleasant occurrence took place, \'91and\
everythink goes contrary with me.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, it\'92ll soon leave off,\'92 said Peggotty--I again mean our\
Peggotty--\'91and besides, you know, it\'92s not more disagreeable to you than\
to us.\'92\
\
\'91I feel it more,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge.\
\
It was a very cold day, with cutting blasts of wind. Mrs. Gummidge\'92s\
peculiar corner of the fireside seemed to me to be the warmest and\
snuggest in the place, as her chair was certainly the easiest, but it\
didn\'92t suit her that day at all. She was constantly complaining of the\
cold, and of its occasioning a visitation in her back which she called\
\'91the creeps\'92. At last she shed tears on that subject, and said again\
that she was \'91a lone lorn creetur\'92 and everythink went contrary with\
her\'92.\
\
\'91It is certainly very cold,\'92 said Peggotty. \'91Everybody must feel it so.\'92\
\
\'91I feel it more than other people,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge.\
\
So at dinner; when Mrs. Gummidge was always helped immediately after me,\
to whom the preference was given as a visitor of distinction. The\
fish were small and bony, and the potatoes were a little burnt. We all\
acknowledged that we felt this something of a disappointment; but Mrs.\
Gummidge said she felt it more than we did, and shed tears again, and\
made that former declaration with great bitterness.\
\
Accordingly, when Mr. Peggotty came home about nine o\'92clock, this\
unfortunate Mrs. Gummidge was knitting in her corner, in a very wretched\
and miserable condition. Peggotty had been working cheerfully. Ham had\
been patching up a great pair of waterboots; and I, with little Em\'92ly\
by my side, had been reading to them. Mrs. Gummidge had never made any\
other remark than a forlorn sigh, and had never raised her eyes since\
tea.\
\
\'91Well, Mates,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, taking his seat, \'91and how are you?\'92\
\
We all said something, or looked something, to welcome him, except Mrs.\
Gummidge, who only shook her head over her knitting.\
\
\'91What\'92s amiss?\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, with a clap of his hands. \'91Cheer up,\
old Mawther!\'92 (Mr. Peggotty meant old girl.)\
\
Mrs. Gummidge did not appear to be able to cheer up. She took out an old\
black silk handkerchief and wiped her eyes; but instead of putting it\
in her pocket, kept it out, and wiped them again, and still kept it out,\
ready for use.\
\
\'91What\'92s amiss, dame?\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91Nothing,\'92 returned Mrs. Gummidge. \'91You\'92ve come from The Willing Mind,\
Dan\'92l?\'92\
\
\'91Why yes, I\'92ve took a short spell at The Willing Mind tonight,\'92 said Mr.\
Peggotty.\
\
\'91I\'92m sorry I should drive you there,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge.\
\
\'91Drive! I don\'92t want no driving,\'92 returned Mr. Peggotty with an honest\
laugh. \'91I only go too ready.\'92\
\
\'91Very ready,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge, shaking her head, and wiping her eyes.\
\'91Yes, yes, very ready. I am sorry it should be along of me that you\'92re\
so ready.\'92\
\
\'91Along o\'92 you! It an\'92t along o\'92 you!\'92 said Mr. Peggotty. \'91Don\'92t ye\
believe a bit on it.\'92\
\
\'91Yes, yes, it is,\'92 cried Mrs. Gummidge. \'91I know what I am. I know that I\
am a lone lorn creetur\'92, and not only that everythink goes contrary with\
me, but that I go contrary with everybody. Yes, yes. I feel more than\
other people do, and I show it more. It\'92s my misfortun\'92.\'92\
\
I really couldn\'92t help thinking, as I sat taking in all this, that the\
misfortune extended to some other members of that family besides Mrs.\
Gummidge. But Mr. Peggotty made no such retort, only answering with\
another entreaty to Mrs. Gummidge to cheer up.\
\
\'91I an\'92t what I could wish myself to be,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge. \'91I am far\
from it. I know what I am. My troubles has made me contrary. I feel my\
troubles, and they make me contrary. I wish I didn\'92t feel \'91em, but I\
do. I wish I could be hardened to \'91em, but I an\'92t. I make the house\
uncomfortable. I don\'92t wonder at it. I\'92ve made your sister so all day,\
and Master Davy.\'92\
\
Here I was suddenly melted, and roared out, \'91No, you haven\'92t, Mrs.\
Gummidge,\'92 in great mental distress.\
\
\'91It\'92s far from right that I should do it,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge. \'91It an\'92t\
a fit return. I had better go into the house and die. I am a lone lorn\
creetur\'92, and had much better not make myself contrary here. If thinks\
must go contrary with me, and I must go contrary myself, let me go\
contrary in my parish. Dan\'92l, I\'92d better go into the house, and die and\
be a riddance!\'92\
\
Mrs. Gummidge retired with these words, and betook herself to bed. When\
she was gone, Mr. Peggotty, who had not exhibited a trace of any feeling\
but the profoundest sympathy, looked round upon us, and nodding his head\
with a lively expression of that sentiment still animating his face,\
said in a whisper:\
\
\'91She\'92s been thinking of the old \'91un!\'92\
\
I did not quite understand what old one Mrs. Gummidge was supposed to\
have fixed her mind upon, until Peggotty, on seeing me to bed, explained\
that it was the late Mr. Gummidge; and that her brother always took that\
for a received truth on such occasions, and that it always had a moving\
effect upon him. Some time after he was in his hammock that night, I\
heard him myself repeat to Ham, \'91Poor thing! She\'92s been thinking of the\
old \'91un!\'92 And whenever Mrs. Gummidge was overcome in a similar manner\
during the remainder of our stay (which happened some few times), he\
always said the same thing in extenuation of the circumstance, and\
always with the tenderest commiseration.\
\
So the fortnight slipped away, varied by nothing but the variation of\
the tide, which altered Mr. Peggotty\'92s times of going out and coming in,\
and altered Ham\'92s engagements also. When the latter was unemployed, he\
sometimes walked with us to show us the boats and ships, and once\
or twice he took us for a row. I don\'92t know why one slight set of\
impressions should be more particularly associated with a place than\
another, though I believe this obtains with most people, in reference\
especially to the associations of their childhood. I never hear the\
name, or read the name, of Yarmouth, but I am reminded of a certain\
Sunday morning on the beach, the bells ringing for church, little Em\'92ly\
leaning on my shoulder, Ham lazily dropping stones into the water, and\
the sun, away at sea, just breaking through the heavy mist, and showing\
us the ships, like their own shadows.\
\
At last the day came for going home. I bore up against the separation\
from Mr. Peggotty and Mrs. Gummidge, but my agony of mind at leaving\
little Em\'92ly was piercing. We went arm-in-arm to the public-house where\
the carrier put up, and I promised, on the road, to write to her. (I\
redeemed that promise afterwards, in characters larger than those in\
which apartments are usually announced in manuscript, as being to let.)\
We were greatly overcome at parting; and if ever, in my life, I have had\
a void made in my heart, I had one made that day.\
\
Now, all the time I had been on my visit, I had been ungrateful to my\
home again, and had thought little or nothing about it. But I was no\
sooner turned towards it, than my reproachful young conscience seemed\
to point that way with a ready finger; and I felt, all the more for the\
sinking of my spirits, that it was my nest, and that my mother was my\
comforter and friend.\
\
This gained upon me as we went along; so that the nearer we drew, the\
more familiar the objects became that we passed, the more excited I was\
to get there, and to run into her arms. But Peggotty, instead of sharing\
in those transports, tried to check them (though very kindly), and\
looked confused and out of sorts.\
\
Blunderstone Rookery would come, however, in spite of her, when the\
carrier\'92s horse pleased--and did. How well I recollect it, on a cold\
grey afternoon, with a dull sky, threatening rain!\
\
The door opened, and I looked, half laughing and half crying in my\
pleasant agitation, for my mother. It was not she, but a strange\
servant.\
\
\'91Why, Peggotty!\'92 I said, ruefully, \'91isn\'92t she come home?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, yes, Master Davy,\'92 said Peggotty. \'91She\'92s come home. Wait a bit,\
Master Davy, and I\'92ll--I\'92ll tell you something.\'92\
\
Between her agitation, and her natural awkwardness in getting out of the\
cart, Peggotty was making a most extraordinary festoon of herself, but\
I felt too blank and strange to tell her so. When she had got down, she\
took me by the hand; led me, wondering, into the kitchen; and shut the\
door.\
\
\'91Peggotty!\'92 said I, quite frightened. \'91What\'92s the matter?\'92\
\
\'91Nothing\'92s the matter, bless you, Master Davy dear!\'92 she answered,\
assuming an air of sprightliness.\
\
\'91Something\'92s the matter, I\'92m sure. Where\'92s mama?\'92\
\
\'91Where\'92s mama, Master Davy?\'92 repeated Peggotty.\
\
\'91Yes. Why hasn\'92t she come out to the gate, and what have we come in here\
for? Oh, Peggotty!\'92 My eyes were full, and I felt as if I were going to\
tumble down.\
\
\'91Bless the precious boy!\'92 cried Peggotty, taking hold of me. \'91What is\
it? Speak, my pet!\'92\
\
\'91Not dead, too! Oh, she\'92s not dead, Peggotty?\'92\
\
Peggotty cried out No! with an astonishing volume of voice; and then sat\
down, and began to pant, and said I had given her a turn.\
\
I gave her a hug to take away the turn, or to give her another turn\
in the right direction, and then stood before her, looking at her in\
anxious inquiry.\
\
\'91You see, dear, I should have told you before now,\'92 said Peggotty,\
\'91but I hadn\'92t an opportunity. I ought to have made it, perhaps, but\
I couldn\'92t azackly\'92--that was always the substitute for exactly, in\
Peggotty\'92s militia of words--\'91bring my mind to it.\'92\
\
\'91Go on, Peggotty,\'92 said I, more frightened than before.\
\
\'91Master Davy,\'92 said Peggotty, untying her bonnet with a shaking hand,\
and speaking in a breathless sort of way. \'91What do you think? You have\
got a Pa!\'92\
\
I trembled, and turned white. Something--I don\'92t know what, or\
how--connected with the grave in the churchyard, and the raising of the\
dead, seemed to strike me like an unwholesome wind.\
\
\'91A new one,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91A new one?\'92 I repeated.\
\
Peggotty gave a gasp, as if she were swallowing something that was very\
hard, and, putting out her hand, said:\
\
\'91Come and see him.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t want to see him.\'92 --\'91And your mama,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
I ceased to draw back, and we went straight to the best parlour, where\
she left me. On one side of the fire, sat my mother; on the other, Mr.\
Murdstone. My mother dropped her work, and arose hurriedly, but timidly\
I thought.\
\
\'91Now, Clara my dear,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone. \'91Recollect! control yourself,\
always control yourself! Davy boy, how do you do?\'92\
\
I gave him my hand. After a moment of suspense, I went and kissed my\
mother: she kissed me, patted me gently on the shoulder, and sat down\
again to her work. I could not look at her, I could not look at him,\
I knew quite well that he was looking at us both; and I turned to the\
window and looked out there, at some shrubs that were drooping their\
heads in the cold.\
\
As soon as I could creep away, I crept upstairs. My old dear bedroom was\
changed, and I was to lie a long way off. I rambled downstairs to find\
anything that was like itself, so altered it all seemed; and roamed into\
the yard. I very soon started back from there, for the empty dog-kennel\
was filled up with a great dog--deep mouthed and black-haired like\
Him--and he was very angry at the sight of me, and sprang out to get at\
me.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 4. I FALL INTO DISGRACE\
\
\
If the room to which my bed was removed were a sentient thing that could\
give evidence, I might appeal to it at this day--who sleeps there now,\
I wonder!--to bear witness for me what a heavy heart I carried to it.\
I went up there, hearing the dog in the yard bark after me all the way\
while I climbed the stairs; and, looking as blank and strange upon the\
room as the room looked upon me, sat down with my small hands crossed,\
and thought.\
\
I thought of the oddest things. Of the shape of the room, of the\
cracks in the ceiling, of the paper on the walls, of the flaws in\
the window-glass making ripples and dimples on the prospect, of the\
washing-stand being rickety on its three legs, and having a discontented\
something about it, which reminded me of Mrs. Gummidge under the\
influence of the old one. I was crying all the time, but, except that I\
was conscious of being cold and dejected, I am sure I never thought\
why I cried. At last in my desolation I began to consider that I was\
dreadfully in love with little Em\'92ly, and had been torn away from her to\
come here where no one seemed to want me, or to care about me, half as\
much as she did. This made such a very miserable piece of business of\
it, that I rolled myself up in a corner of the counterpane, and cried\
myself to sleep.\
\
I was awoke by somebody saying \'91Here he is!\'92 and uncovering my hot head.\
My mother and Peggotty had come to look for me, and it was one of them\
who had done it.\
\
\'91Davy,\'92 said my mother. \'91What\'92s the matter?\'92\
\
I thought it was very strange that she should ask me, and answered,\
\'91Nothing.\'92 I turned over on my face, I recollect, to hide my trembling\
lip, which answered her with greater truth. \'91Davy,\'92 said my mother.\
\'91Davy, my child!\'92\
\
I dare say no words she could have uttered would have affected me\
so much, then, as her calling me her child. I hid my tears in the\
bedclothes, and pressed her from me with my hand, when she would have\
raised me up.\
\
\'91This is your doing, Peggotty, you cruel thing!\'92 said my mother. \'91I have\
no doubt at all about it. How can you reconcile it to your conscience,\
I wonder, to prejudice my own boy against me, or against anybody who is\
dear to me? What do you mean by it, Peggotty?\'92\
\
Poor Peggotty lifted up her hands and eyes, and only answered, in a\
sort of paraphrase of the grace I usually repeated after dinner, \'91Lord\
forgive you, Mrs. Copperfield, and for what you have said this minute,\
may you never be truly sorry!\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s enough to distract me,\'92 cried my mother. \'91In my honeymoon, too,\
when my most inveterate enemy might relent, one would think, and not\
envy me a little peace of mind and happiness. Davy, you naughty boy!\
Peggotty, you savage creature! Oh, dear me!\'92 cried my mother, turning\
from one of us to the other, in her pettish wilful manner, \'91what a\
troublesome world this is, when one has the most right to expect it to\
be as agreeable as possible!\'92\
\
I felt the touch of a hand that I knew was neither hers nor Peggotty\'92s,\
and slipped to my feet at the bed-side. It was Mr. Murdstone\'92s hand, and\
he kept it on my arm as he said:\
\
\'91What\'92s this? Clara, my love, have you forgotten?--Firmness, my dear!\'92\
\
\'91I am very sorry, Edward,\'92 said my mother. \'91I meant to be very good, but\
I am so uncomfortable.\'92\
\
\'91Indeed!\'92 he answered. \'91That\'92s a bad hearing, so soon, Clara.\'92\
\
\'91I say it\'92s very hard I should be made so now,\'92 returned my mother,\
pouting; \'91and it is--very hard--isn\'92t it?\'92\
\
He drew her to him, whispered in her ear, and kissed her. I knew as\
well, when I saw my mother\'92s head lean down upon his shoulder, and her\
arm touch his neck--I knew as well that he could mould her pliant nature\
into any form he chose, as I know, now, that he did it.\
\
\'91Go you below, my love,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone. \'91David and I will come\
down, together. My friend,\'92 turning a darkening face on Peggotty, when\
he had watched my mother out, and dismissed her with a nod and a smile;\
\'91do you know your mistress\'92s name?\'92\
\
\'91She has been my mistress a long time, sir,\'92 answered Peggotty, \'91I ought\
to know it.\'92 \'91That\'92s true,\'92 he answered. \'91But I thought I heard you, as\
I came upstairs, address her by a name that is not hers. She has taken\
mine, you know. Will you remember that?\'92\
\
Peggotty, with some uneasy glances at me, curtseyed herself out of the\
room without replying; seeing, I suppose, that she was expected to go,\
and had no excuse for remaining. When we two were left alone, he shut\
the door, and sitting on a chair, and holding me standing before him,\
looked steadily into my eyes. I felt my own attracted, no less steadily,\
to his. As I recall our being opposed thus, face to face, I seem again\
to hear my heart beat fast and high.\
\
\'91David,\'92 he said, making his lips thin, by pressing them together, \'91if I\
have an obstinate horse or dog to deal with, what do you think I do?\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know.\'92\
\
\'91I beat him.\'92\
\
I had answered in a kind of breathless whisper, but I felt, in my\
silence, that my breath was shorter now.\
\
\'91I make him wince, and smart. I say to myself, \'93I\'92ll conquer that\
fellow\'94; and if it were to cost him all the blood he had, I should do\
it. What is that upon your face?\'92\
\
\'91Dirt,\'92 I said.\
\
He knew it was the mark of tears as well as I. But if he had asked the\
question twenty times, each time with twenty blows, I believe my baby\
heart would have burst before I would have told him so.\
\
\'91You have a good deal of intelligence for a little fellow,\'92 he said,\
with a grave smile that belonged to him, \'91and you understood me very\
well, I see. Wash that face, sir, and come down with me.\'92\
\
He pointed to the washing-stand, which I had made out to be like Mrs.\
Gummidge, and motioned me with his head to obey him directly. I had\
little doubt then, and I have less doubt now, that he would have knocked\
me down without the least compunction, if I had hesitated.\
\
\'91Clara, my dear,\'92 he said, when I had done his bidding, and he walked me\
into the parlour, with his hand still on my arm; \'91you will not be made\
uncomfortable any more, I hope. We shall soon improve our youthful\
humours.\'92\
\
God help me, I might have been improved for my whole life, I might have\
been made another creature perhaps, for life, by a kind word at that\
season. A word of encouragement and explanation, of pity for my childish\
ignorance, of welcome home, of reassurance to me that it was home, might\
have made me dutiful to him in my heart henceforth, instead of in my\
hypocritical outside, and might have made me respect instead of hate\
him. I thought my mother was sorry to see me standing in the room so\
scared and strange, and that, presently, when I stole to a chair, she\
followed me with her eyes more sorrowfully still--missing, perhaps, some\
freedom in my childish tread--but the word was not spoken, and the time\
for it was gone.\
\
We dined alone, we three together. He seemed to be very fond of my\
mother--I am afraid I liked him none the better for that--and she was\
very fond of him. I gathered from what they said, that an elder sister\
of his was coming to stay with them, and that she was expected that\
evening. I am not certain whether I found out then, or afterwards, that,\
without being actively concerned in any business, he had some share in,\
or some annual charge upon the profits of, a wine-merchant\'92s house\
in London, with which his family had been connected from his\
great-grandfather\'92s time, and in which his sister had a similar\
interest; but I may mention it in this place, whether or no.\
\
After dinner, when we were sitting by the fire, and I was meditating an\
escape to Peggotty without having the hardihood to slip away, lest\
it should offend the master of the house, a coach drove up to the\
garden-gate and he went out to receive the visitor. My mother followed\
him. I was timidly following her, when she turned round at the parlour\
door, in the dusk, and taking me in her embrace as she had been used to\
do, whispered me to love my new father and be obedient to him. She did\
this hurriedly and secretly, as if it were wrong, but tenderly; and,\
putting out her hand behind her, held mine in it, until we came near\
to where he was standing in the garden, where she let mine go, and drew\
hers through his arm.\
\
It was Miss Murdstone who was arrived, and a gloomy-looking lady she\
was; dark, like her brother, whom she greatly resembled in face and\
voice; and with very heavy eyebrows, nearly meeting over her large nose,\
as if, being disabled by the wrongs of her sex from wearing whiskers,\
she had carried them to that account. She brought with her two\
uncompromising hard black boxes, with her initials on the lids in hard\
brass nails. When she paid the coachman she took her money out of a hard\
steel purse, and she kept the purse in a very jail of a bag which hung\
upon her arm by a heavy chain, and shut up like a bite. I had never, at\
that time, seen such a metallic lady altogether as Miss Murdstone was.\
\
She was brought into the parlour with many tokens of welcome, and there\
formally recognized my mother as a new and near relation. Then she\
looked at me, and said:\
\
\'91Is that your boy, sister-in-law?\'92\
\
My mother acknowledged me.\
\
\'91Generally speaking,\'92 said Miss Murdstone, \'91I don\'92t like boys. How d\'92ye\
do, boy?\'92\
\
Under these encouraging circumstances, I replied that I was very well,\
and that I hoped she was the same; with such an indifferent grace, that\
Miss Murdstone disposed of me in two words:\
\
\'91Wants manner!\'92\
\
Having uttered which, with great distinctness, she begged the favour of\
being shown to her room, which became to me from that time forth a place\
of awe and dread, wherein the two black boxes were never seen open or\
known to be left unlocked, and where (for I peeped in once or twice when\
she was out) numerous little steel fetters and rivets, with which Miss\
Murdstone embellished herself when she was dressed, generally hung upon\
the looking-glass in formidable array.\
\
As well as I could make out, she had come for good, and had no intention\
of ever going again. She began to \'91help\'92 my mother next morning, and was\
in and out of the store-closet all day, putting things to rights, and\
making havoc in the old arrangements. Almost the first remarkable thing\
I observed in Miss Murdstone was, her being constantly haunted by\
a suspicion that the servants had a man secreted somewhere on the\
premises. Under the influence of this delusion, she dived into the\
coal-cellar at the most untimely hours, and scarcely ever opened the\
door of a dark cupboard without clapping it to again, in the belief that\
she had got him.\
\
Though there was nothing very airy about Miss Murdstone, she was a\
perfect Lark in point of getting up. She was up (and, as I believe\
to this hour, looking for that man) before anybody in the house was\
stirring. Peggotty gave it as her opinion that she even slept with one\
eye open; but I could not concur in this idea; for I tried it myself\
after hearing the suggestion thrown out, and found it couldn\'92t be done.\
\
On the very first morning after her arrival she was up and ringing her\
bell at cock-crow. When my mother came down to breakfast and was going\
to make the tea, Miss Murdstone gave her a kind of peck on the cheek,\
which was her nearest approach to a kiss, and said:\
\
\'91Now, Clara, my dear, I am come here, you know, to relieve you of all\
the trouble I can. You\'92re much too pretty and thoughtless\'92--my mother\
blushed but laughed, and seemed not to dislike this character--\'91to have\
any duties imposed upon you that can be undertaken by me. If you\'92ll be\
so good as give me your keys, my dear, I\'92ll attend to all this sort of\
thing in future.\'92\
\
From that time, Miss Murdstone kept the keys in her own little jail all\
day, and under her pillow all night, and my mother had no more to do\
with them than I had.\
\
My mother did not suffer her authority to pass from her without a shadow\
of protest. One night when Miss Murdstone had been developing certain\
household plans to her brother, of which he signified his approbation,\
my mother suddenly began to cry, and said she thought she might have\
been consulted.\
\
\'91Clara!\'92 said Mr. Murdstone sternly. \'91Clara! I wonder at you.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, it\'92s very well to say you wonder, Edward!\'92 cried my mother, \'91and\
it\'92s very well for you to talk about firmness, but you wouldn\'92t like it\
yourself.\'92\
\
Firmness, I may observe, was the grand quality on which both Mr. and\
Miss Murdstone took their stand. However I might have expressed\
my comprehension of it at that time, if I had been called upon, I\
nevertheless did clearly comprehend in my own way, that it was another\
name for tyranny; and for a certain gloomy, arrogant, devil\'92s humour,\
that was in them both. The creed, as I should state it now, was this.\
Mr. Murdstone was firm; nobody in his world was to be so firm as Mr.\
Murdstone; nobody else in his world was to be firm at all, for everybody\
was to be bent to his firmness. Miss Murdstone was an exception.\
She might be firm, but only by relationship, and in an inferior and\
tributary degree. My mother was another exception. She might be firm,\
and must be; but only in bearing their firmness, and firmly believing\
there was no other firmness upon earth.\
\
\'91It\'92s very hard,\'92 said my mother, \'91that in my own house--\'92\
\
\'91My own house?\'92 repeated Mr. Murdstone. \'91Clara!\'92\
\
\'91OUR own house, I mean,\'92 faltered my mother, evidently frightened--\'91I\
hope you must know what I mean, Edward--it\'92s very hard that in YOUR own\
house I may not have a word to say about domestic matters. I am sure\
I managed very well before we were married. There\'92s evidence,\'92 said my\
mother, sobbing; \'91ask Peggotty if I didn\'92t do very well when I wasn\'92t\
interfered with!\'92\
\
\'91Edward,\'92 said Miss Murdstone, \'91let there be an end of this. I go\
tomorrow.\'92\
\
\'91Jane Murdstone,\'92 said her brother, \'91be silent! How dare you to\
insinuate that you don\'92t know my character better than your words\
imply?\'92\
\
\'91I am sure,\'92 my poor mother went on, at a grievous disadvantage, and\
with many tears, \'91I don\'92t want anybody to go. I should be very\
miserable and unhappy if anybody was to go. I don\'92t ask much. I am not\
unreasonable. I only want to be consulted sometimes. I am very much\
obliged to anybody who assists me, and I only want to be consulted as a\
mere form, sometimes. I thought you were pleased, once, with my being a\
little inexperienced and girlish, Edward--I am sure you said so--but you\
seem to hate me for it now, you are so severe.\'92\
\
\'91Edward,\'92 said Miss Murdstone, again, \'91let there be an end of this. I go\
tomorrow.\'92\
\
\'91Jane Murdstone,\'92 thundered Mr. Murdstone. \'91Will you be silent? How dare\
you?\'92\
\
Miss Murdstone made a jail-delivery of her pocket-handkerchief, and held\
it before her eyes.\
\
\'91Clara,\'92 he continued, looking at my mother, \'91you surprise me! You\
astound me! Yes, I had a satisfaction in the thought of marrying\
an inexperienced and artless person, and forming her character, and\
infusing into it some amount of that firmness and decision of which\
it stood in need. But when Jane Murdstone is kind enough to come to my\
assistance in this endeavour, and to assume, for my sake, a condition\
something like a housekeeper\'92s, and when she meets with a base return--\'92\
\
\'91Oh, pray, pray, Edward,\'92 cried my mother, \'91don\'92t accuse me of being\
ungrateful. I am sure I am not ungrateful. No one ever said I was\
before. I have many faults, but not that. Oh, don\'92t, my dear!\'92\
\
\'91When Jane Murdstone meets, I say,\'92 he went on, after waiting until my\
mother was silent, \'91with a base return, that feeling of mine is chilled\
and altered.\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t, my love, say that!\'92 implored my mother very piteously.\
\'91Oh, don\'92t, Edward! I can\'92t bear to hear it. Whatever I am, I am\
affectionate. I know I am affectionate. I wouldn\'92t say it, if I\
wasn\'92t sure that I am. Ask Peggotty. I am sure she\'92ll tell you I\'92m\
affectionate.\'92\
\
\'91There is no extent of mere weakness, Clara,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone in\
reply, \'91that can have the least weight with me. You lose breath.\'92\
\
\'91Pray let us be friends,\'92 said my mother, \'91I couldn\'92t live under\
coldness or unkindness. I am so sorry. I have a great many defects, I\
know, and it\'92s very good of you, Edward, with your strength of mind, to\
endeavour to correct them for me. Jane, I don\'92t object to anything. I\
should be quite broken-hearted if you thought of leaving--\'92 My mother\
was too much overcome to go on.\
\
\'91Jane Murdstone,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone to his sister, \'91any harsh words\
between us are, I hope, uncommon. It is not my fault that so unusual an\
occurrence has taken place tonight. I was betrayed into it by another.\
Nor is it your fault. You were betrayed into it by another. Let us both\
try to forget it. And as this,\'92 he added, after these magnanimous words,\
\'91is not a fit scene for the boy--David, go to bed!\'92\
\
I could hardly find the door, through the tears that stood in my eyes.\
I was so sorry for my mother\'92s distress; but I groped my way out, and\
groped my way up to my room in the dark, without even having the heart\
to say good night to Peggotty, or to get a candle from her. When her\
coming up to look for me, an hour or so afterwards, awoke me, she said\
that my mother had gone to bed poorly, and that Mr. and Miss Murdstone\
were sitting alone.\
\
Going down next morning rather earlier than usual, I paused outside the\
parlour door, on hearing my mother\'92s voice. She was very earnestly and\
humbly entreating Miss Murdstone\'92s pardon, which that lady granted, and\
a perfect reconciliation took place. I never knew my mother afterwards\
to give an opinion on any matter, without first appealing to Miss\
Murdstone, or without having first ascertained by some sure means, what\
Miss Murdstone\'92s opinion was; and I never saw Miss Murdstone, when out\
of temper (she was infirm that way), move her hand towards her bag as\
if she were going to take out the keys and offer to resign them to my\
mother, without seeing that my mother was in a terrible fright.\
\
The gloomy taint that was in the Murdstone blood, darkened the Murdstone\
religion, which was austere and wrathful. I have thought, since,\
that its assuming that character was a necessary consequence of Mr.\
Murdstone\'92s firmness, which wouldn\'92t allow him to let anybody off from\
the utmost weight of the severest penalties he could find any excuse\
for. Be this as it may, I well remember the tremendous visages with\
which we used to go to church, and the changed air of the place. Again,\
the dreaded Sunday comes round, and I file into the old pew first, like\
a guarded captive brought to a condemned service. Again, Miss Murdstone,\
in a black velvet gown, that looks as if it had been made out of a pall,\
follows close upon me; then my mother; then her husband. There is no\
Peggotty now, as in the old time. Again, I listen to Miss Murdstone\
mumbling the responses, and emphasizing all the dread words with a cruel\
relish. Again, I see her dark eyes roll round the church when she says\
\'91miserable sinners\'92, as if she were calling all the congregation names.\
Again, I catch rare glimpses of my mother, moving her lips timidly\
between the two, with one of them muttering at each ear like low\
thunder. Again, I wonder with a sudden fear whether it is likely that\
our good old clergyman can be wrong, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone right,\
and that all the angels in Heaven can be destroying angels. Again, if I\
move a finger or relax a muscle of my face, Miss Murdstone pokes me with\
her prayer-book, and makes my side ache.\
\
Yes, and again, as we walk home, I note some neighbours looking at my\
mother and at me, and whispering. Again, as the three go on arm-in-arm,\
and I linger behind alone, I follow some of those looks, and wonder if\
my mother\'92s step be really not so light as I have seen it, and if the\
gaiety of her beauty be really almost worried away. Again, I wonder\
whether any of the neighbours call to mind, as I do, how we used to\
walk home together, she and I; and I wonder stupidly about that, all the\
dreary dismal day.\
\
There had been some talk on occasions of my going to boarding-school.\
Mr. and Miss Murdstone had originated it, and my mother had of course\
agreed with them. Nothing, however, was concluded on the subject yet.\
In the meantime, I learnt lessons at home. Shall I ever forget those\
lessons! They were presided over nominally by my mother, but really by\
Mr. Murdstone and his sister, who were always present, and found them\
a favourable occasion for giving my mother lessons in that miscalled\
firmness, which was the bane of both our lives. I believe I was kept\
at home for that purpose. I had been apt enough to learn, and willing\
enough, when my mother and I had lived alone together. I can faintly\
remember learning the alphabet at her knee. To this day, when I look\
upon the fat black letters in the primer, the puzzling novelty of their\
shapes, and the easy good-nature of O and Q and S, seem to present\
themselves again before me as they used to do. But they recall no\
feeling of disgust or reluctance. On the contrary, I seem to have walked\
along a path of flowers as far as the crocodile-book, and to have been\
cheered by the gentleness of my mother\'92s voice and manner all the\
way. But these solemn lessons which succeeded those, I remember as the\
death-blow of my peace, and a grievous daily drudgery and misery. They\
were very long, very numerous, very hard--perfectly unintelligible,\
some of them, to me--and I was generally as much bewildered by them as I\
believe my poor mother was herself.\
\
Let me remember how it used to be, and bring one morning back again.\
\
I come into the second-best parlour after breakfast, with my books,\
and an exercise-book, and a slate. My mother is ready for me at her\
writing-desk, but not half so ready as Mr. Murdstone in his easy-chair\
by the window (though he pretends to be reading a book), or as Miss\
Murdstone, sitting near my mother stringing steel beads. The very sight\
of these two has such an influence over me, that I begin to feel the\
words I have been at infinite pains to get into my head, all sliding\
away, and going I don\'92t know where. I wonder where they do go, by the\
by?\
\
I hand the first book to my mother. Perhaps it is a grammar, perhaps a\
history, or geography. I take a last drowning look at the page as I give\
it into her hand, and start off aloud at a racing pace while I have\
got it fresh. I trip over a word. Mr. Murdstone looks up. I trip\
over another word. Miss Murdstone looks up. I redden, tumble over\
half-a-dozen words, and stop. I think my mother would show me the book\
if she dared, but she does not dare, and she says softly:\
\
\'91Oh, Davy, Davy!\'92\
\
\'91Now, Clara,\'92 says Mr. Murdstone, \'91be firm with the boy. Don\'92t say, \'93Oh,\
Davy, Davy!\'94 That\'92s childish. He knows his lesson, or he does not know\
it.\'92\
\
\'91He does NOT know it,\'92 Miss Murdstone interposes awfully.\
\
\'91I am really afraid he does not,\'92 says my mother.\
\
\'91Then, you see, Clara,\'92 returns Miss Murdstone, \'91you should just give\
him the book back, and make him know it.\'92\
\
\'91Yes, certainly,\'92 says my mother; \'91that is what I intend to do, my dear\
Jane. Now, Davy, try once more, and don\'92t be stupid.\'92\
\
I obey the first clause of the injunction by trying once more, but am\
not so successful with the second, for I am very stupid. I tumble down\
before I get to the old place, at a point where I was all right before,\
and stop to think. But I can\'92t think about the lesson. I think of the\
number of yards of net in Miss Murdstone\'92s cap, or of the price of Mr.\
Murdstone\'92s dressing-gown, or any such ridiculous problem that I have\
no business with, and don\'92t want to have anything at all to do with. Mr.\
Murdstone makes a movement of impatience which I have been expecting\
for a long time. Miss Murdstone does the same. My mother glances\
submissively at them, shuts the book, and lays it by as an arrear to be\
worked out when my other tasks are done.\
\
There is a pile of these arrears very soon, and it swells like a rolling\
snowball. The bigger it gets, the more stupid I get. The case is so\
hopeless, and I feel that I am wallowing in such a bog of nonsense, that\
I give up all idea of getting out, and abandon myself to my fate. The\
despairing way in which my mother and I look at each other, as I blunder\
on, is truly melancholy. But the greatest effect in these miserable\
lessons is when my mother (thinking nobody is observing her) tries\
to give me the cue by the motion of her lips. At that instant, Miss\
Murdstone, who has been lying in wait for nothing else all along, says\
in a deep warning voice:\
\
\'91Clara!\'92\
\
My mother starts, colours, and smiles faintly. Mr. Murdstone comes out\
of his chair, takes the book, throws it at me or boxes my ears with it,\
and turns me out of the room by the shoulders.\
\
Even when the lessons are done, the worst is yet to happen, in the shape\
of an appalling sum. This is invented for me, and delivered to me orally\
by Mr. Murdstone, and begins, \'91If I go into a cheesemonger\'92s shop, and\
buy five thousand double-Gloucester cheeses at fourpence-halfpenny each,\
present payment\'92--at which I see Miss Murdstone secretly overjoyed.\
I pore over these cheeses without any result or enlightenment until\
dinner-time, when, having made a Mulatto of myself by getting the dirt\
of the slate into the pores of my skin, I have a slice of bread to help\
me out with the cheeses, and am considered in disgrace for the rest of\
the evening.\
\
It seems to me, at this distance of time, as if my unfortunate studies\
generally took this course. I could have done very well if I had been\
without the Murdstones; but the influence of the Murdstones upon me was\
like the fascination of two snakes on a wretched young bird. Even when\
I did get through the morning with tolerable credit, there was not\
much gained but dinner; for Miss Murdstone never could endure to see me\
untasked, and if I rashly made any show of being unemployed, called her\
brother\'92s attention to me by saying, \'91Clara, my dear, there\'92s nothing\
like work--give your boy an exercise\'92; which caused me to be clapped\
down to some new labour, there and then. As to any recreation with other\
children of my age, I had very little of that; for the gloomy theology\
of the Murdstones made all children out to be a swarm of little vipers\
(though there WAS a child once set in the midst of the Disciples), and\
held that they contaminated one another.\
\
The natural result of this treatment, continued, I suppose, for some six\
months or more, was to make me sullen, dull, and dogged. I was not\
made the less so by my sense of being daily more and more shut out and\
alienated from my mother. I believe I should have been almost stupefied\
but for one circumstance.\
\
It was this. My father had left a small collection of books in a little\
room upstairs, to which I had access (for it adjoined my own) and which\
nobody else in our house ever troubled. From that blessed little room,\
Roderick Random, Peregrine Pickle, Humphrey Clinker, Tom Jones, the\
Vicar of Wakefield, Don Quixote, Gil Blas, and Robinson Crusoe, came\
out, a glorious host, to keep me company. They kept alive my fancy, and\
my hope of something beyond that place and time,--they, and the Arabian\
Nights, and the Tales of the Genii,--and did me no harm; for whatever\
harm was in some of them was not there for me; I knew nothing of it. It\
is astonishing to me now, how I found time, in the midst of my porings\
and blunderings over heavier themes, to read those books as I did. It\
is curious to me how I could ever have consoled myself under my\
small troubles (which were great troubles to me), by impersonating my\
favourite characters in them--as I did--and by putting Mr. and Miss\
Murdstone into all the bad ones--which I did too. I have been Tom Jones\
(a child\'92s Tom Jones, a harmless creature) for a week together. I have\
sustained my own idea of Roderick Random for a month at a stretch, I\
verily believe. I had a greedy relish for a few volumes of Voyages and\
Travels--I forget what, now--that were on those shelves; and for days\
and days I can remember to have gone about my region of our house,\
armed with the centre-piece out of an old set of boot-trees--the perfect\
realization of Captain Somebody, of the Royal British Navy, in danger of\
being beset by savages, and resolved to sell his life at a great price.\
The Captain never lost dignity, from having his ears boxed with the\
Latin Grammar. I did; but the Captain was a Captain and a hero, in\
despite of all the grammars of all the languages in the world, dead or\
alive.\
\
This was my only and my constant comfort. When I think of it, the\
picture always rises in my mind, of a summer evening, the boys at play\
in the churchyard, and I sitting on my bed, reading as if for life.\
Every barn in the neighbourhood, every stone in the church, and every\
foot of the churchyard, had some association of its own, in my mind,\
connected with these books, and stood for some locality made famous in\
them. I have seen Tom Pipes go climbing up the church-steeple; I have\
watched Strap, with the knapsack on his back, stopping to rest himself\
upon the wicket-gate; and I know that Commodore Trunnion held that club\
with Mr. Pickle, in the parlour of our little village alehouse.\
\
The reader now understands, as well as I do, what I was when I came to\
that point of my youthful history to which I am now coming again.\
\
One morning when I went into the parlour with my books, I found my\
mother looking anxious, Miss Murdstone looking firm, and Mr. Murdstone\
binding something round the bottom of a cane--a lithe and limber cane,\
which he left off binding when I came in, and poised and switched in the\
air.\
\
\'91I tell you, Clara,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, \'91I have been often flogged\
myself.\'92\
\
\'91To be sure; of course,\'92 said Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91Certainly, my dear Jane,\'92 faltered my mother, meekly. \'91But--but do you\
think it did Edward good?\'92\
\
\'91Do you think it did Edward harm, Clara?\'92 asked Mr. Murdstone, gravely.\
\
\'91That\'92s the point,\'92 said his sister.\
\
To this my mother returned, \'91Certainly, my dear Jane,\'92 and said no more.\
\
I felt apprehensive that I was personally interested in this dialogue,\
and sought Mr. Murdstone\'92s eye as it lighted on mine.\
\
\'91Now, David,\'92 he said--and I saw that cast again as he said it--\'91you\
must be far more careful today than usual.\'92 He gave the cane another\
poise, and another switch; and having finished his preparation of it,\
laid it down beside him, with an impressive look, and took up his book.\
\
This was a good freshener to my presence of mind, as a beginning. I felt\
the words of my lessons slipping off, not one by one, or line by line,\
but by the entire page; I tried to lay hold of them; but they seemed,\
if I may so express it, to have put skates on, and to skim away from me\
with a smoothness there was no checking.\
\
We began badly, and went on worse. I had come in with an idea of\
distinguishing myself rather, conceiving that I was very well prepared;\
but it turned out to be quite a mistake. Book after book was added to\
the heap of failures, Miss Murdstone being firmly watchful of us all the\
time. And when we came at last to the five thousand cheeses (canes he\
made it that day, I remember), my mother burst out crying.\
\
\'91Clara!\'92 said Miss Murdstone, in her warning voice.\
\
\'91I am not quite well, my dear Jane, I think,\'92 said my mother.\
\
I saw him wink, solemnly, at his sister, as he rose and said, taking up\
the cane:\
\
\'91Why, Jane, we can hardly expect Clara to bear, with perfect firmness,\
the worry and torment that David has occasioned her today. That would be\
stoical. Clara is greatly strengthened and improved, but we can hardly\
expect so much from her. David, you and I will go upstairs, boy.\'92\
\
As he took me out at the door, my mother ran towards us. Miss Murdstone\
said, \'91Clara! are you a perfect fool?\'92 and interfered. I saw my mother\
stop her ears then, and I heard her crying.\
\
He walked me up to my room slowly and gravely--I am certain he had a\
delight in that formal parade of executing justice--and when we got\
there, suddenly twisted my head under his arm.\
\
\'91Mr. Murdstone! Sir!\'92 I cried to him. \'91Don\'92t! Pray don\'92t beat me! I have\
tried to learn, sir, but I can\'92t learn while you and Miss Murdstone are\
by. I can\'92t indeed!\'92\
\
\'91Can\'92t you, indeed, David?\'92 he said. \'91We\'92ll try that.\'92\
\
He had my head as in a vice, but I twined round him somehow, and stopped\
him for a moment, entreating him not to beat me. It was only a moment\
that I stopped him, for he cut me heavily an instant afterwards, and in\
the same instant I caught the hand with which he held me in my mouth,\
between my teeth, and bit it through. It sets my teeth on edge to think\
of it.\
\
He beat me then, as if he would have beaten me to death. Above all the\
noise we made, I heard them running up the stairs, and crying out--I\
heard my mother crying out--and Peggotty. Then he was gone; and the\
door was locked outside; and I was lying, fevered and hot, and torn, and\
sore, and raging in my puny way, upon the floor.\
\
How well I recollect, when I became quiet, what an unnatural stillness\
seemed to reign through the whole house! How well I remember, when my\
smart and passion began to cool, how wicked I began to feel!\
\
I sat listening for a long while, but there was not a sound. I crawled\
up from the floor, and saw my face in the glass, so swollen, red, and\
ugly that it almost frightened me. My stripes were sore and stiff, and\
made me cry afresh, when I moved; but they were nothing to the guilt I\
felt. It lay heavier on my breast than if I had been a most atrocious\
criminal, I dare say.\
\
It had begun to grow dark, and I had shut the window (I had been lying,\
for the most part, with my head upon the sill, by turns crying, dozing,\
and looking listlessly out), when the key was turned, and Miss Murdstone\
came in with some bread and meat, and milk. These she put down upon the\
table without a word, glaring at me the while with exemplary firmness,\
and then retired, locking the door after her.\
\
Long after it was dark I sat there, wondering whether anybody else would\
come. When this appeared improbable for that night, I undressed, and\
went to bed; and, there, I began to wonder fearfully what would be done\
to me. Whether it was a criminal act that I had committed? Whether I\
should be taken into custody, and sent to prison? Whether I was at all\
in danger of being hanged?\
\
I never shall forget the waking, next morning; the being cheerful and\
fresh for the first moment, and then the being weighed down by the stale\
and dismal oppression of remembrance. Miss Murdstone reappeared before\
I was out of bed; told me, in so many words, that I was free to walk in\
the garden for half an hour and no longer; and retired, leaving the door\
open, that I might avail myself of that permission.\
\
I did so, and did so every morning of my imprisonment, which lasted five\
days. If I could have seen my mother alone, I should have gone down on\
my knees to her and besought her forgiveness; but I saw no one, Miss\
Murdstone excepted, during the whole time--except at evening prayers in\
the parlour; to which I was escorted by Miss Murdstone after everybody\
else was placed; where I was stationed, a young outlaw, all alone by\
myself near the door; and whence I was solemnly conducted by my jailer,\
before any one arose from the devotional posture. I only observed that\
my mother was as far off from me as she could be, and kept her face\
another way so that I never saw it; and that Mr. Murdstone\'92s hand was\
bound up in a large linen wrapper.\
\
The length of those five days I can convey no idea of to any one. They\
occupy the place of years in my remembrance. The way in which I listened\
to all the incidents of the house that made themselves audible to me;\
the ringing of bells, the opening and shutting of doors, the murmuring\
of voices, the footsteps on the stairs; to any laughing, whistling, or\
singing, outside, which seemed more dismal than anything else to me in\
my solitude and disgrace--the uncertain pace of the hours, especially\
at night, when I would wake thinking it was morning, and find that the\
family were not yet gone to bed, and that all the length of night had\
yet to come--the depressed dreams and nightmares I had--the return of\
day, noon, afternoon, evening, when the boys played in the churchyard,\
and I watched them from a distance within the room, being ashamed to\
show myself at the window lest they should know I was a prisoner--the\
strange sensation of never hearing myself speak--the fleeting intervals\
of something like cheerfulness, which came with eating and drinking,\
and went away with it--the setting in of rain one evening, with a fresh\
smell, and its coming down faster and faster between me and the church,\
until it and gathering night seemed to quench me in gloom, and fear, and\
remorse--all this appears to have gone round and round for years instead\
of days, it is so vividly and strongly stamped on my remembrance. On the\
last night of my restraint, I was awakened by hearing my own name spoken\
in a whisper. I started up in bed, and putting out my arms in the dark,\
said:\
\
\'91Is that you, Peggotty?\'92\
\
There was no immediate answer, but presently I heard my name again, in a\
tone so very mysterious and awful, that I think I should have gone into\
a fit, if it had not occurred to me that it must have come through the\
keyhole.\
\
I groped my way to the door, and putting my own lips to the keyhole,\
whispered: \'91Is that you, Peggotty dear?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, my own precious Davy,\'92 she replied. \'91Be as soft as a mouse, or the\
Cat\'92ll hear us.\'92\
\
I understood this to mean Miss Murdstone, and was sensible of the\
urgency of the case; her room being close by.\
\
\'91How\'92s mama, dear Peggotty? Is she very angry with me?\'92\
\
I could hear Peggotty crying softly on her side of the keyhole, as I was\
doing on mine, before she answered. \'91No. Not very.\'92\
\
\'91What is going to be done with me, Peggotty dear? Do you know?\'92\
\
\'91School. Near London,\'92 was Peggotty\'92s answer. I was obliged to get her\
to repeat it, for she spoke it the first time quite down my throat,\
in consequence of my having forgotten to take my mouth away from the\
keyhole and put my ear there; and though her words tickled me a good\
deal, I didn\'92t hear them.\
\
\'91When, Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91Tomorrow.\'92\
\
\'91Is that the reason why Miss Murdstone took the clothes out of my\
drawers?\'92 which she had done, though I have forgotten to mention it.\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Peggotty. \'91Box.\'92\
\
\'91Shan\'92t I see mama?\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Peggotty. \'91Morning.\'92\
\
Then Peggotty fitted her mouth close to the keyhole, and delivered these\
words through it with as much feeling and earnestness as a keyhole\
has ever been the medium of communicating, I will venture to assert:\
shooting in each broken little sentence in a convulsive little burst of\
its own.\
\
\'91Davy, dear. If I ain\'92t been azackly as intimate with you. Lately, as I\
used to be. It ain\'92t because I don\'92t love you. Just as well and more, my\
pretty poppet. It\'92s because I thought it better for you. And for someone\
else besides. Davy, my darling, are you listening? Can you hear?\'92\
\
\'91Ye-ye-ye-yes, Peggotty!\'92 I sobbed.\
\
\'91My own!\'92 said Peggotty, with infinite compassion. \'91What I want to say,\
is. That you must never forget me. For I\'92ll never forget you. And I\'92ll\
take as much care of your mama, Davy. As ever I took of you. And I won\'92t\
leave her. The day may come when she\'92ll be glad to lay her poor head.\
On her stupid, cross old Peggotty\'92s arm again. And I\'92ll write to you,\
my dear. Though I ain\'92t no scholar. And I\'92ll--I\'92ll--\'92 Peggotty fell to\
kissing the keyhole, as she couldn\'92t kiss me.\
\
\'91Thank you, dear Peggotty!\'92 said I. \'91Oh, thank you! Thank you! Will you\
promise me one thing, Peggotty? Will you write and tell Mr. Peggotty and\
little Em\'92ly, and Mrs. Gummidge and Ham, that I am not so bad as they\
might suppose, and that I sent \'91em all my love--especially to little\
Em\'92ly? Will you, if you please, Peggotty?\'92\
\
The kind soul promised, and we both of us kissed the keyhole with the\
greatest affection--I patted it with my hand, I recollect, as if it had\
been her honest face--and parted. From that night there grew up in my\
breast a feeling for Peggotty which I cannot very well define. She did\
not replace my mother; no one could do that; but she came into a vacancy\
in my heart, which closed upon her, and I felt towards her something\
I have never felt for any other human being. It was a sort of comical\
affection, too; and yet if she had died, I cannot think what I should\
have done, or how I should have acted out the tragedy it would have been\
to me.\
\
In the morning Miss Murdstone appeared as usual, and told me I was going\
to school; which was not altogether such news to me as she supposed. She\
also informed me that when I was dressed, I was to come downstairs into\
the parlour, and have my breakfast. There, I found my mother, very pale\
and with red eyes: into whose arms I ran, and begged her pardon from my\
suffering soul.\
\
\'91Oh, Davy!\'92 she said. \'91That you could hurt anyone I love! Try to be\
better, pray to be better! I forgive you; but I am so grieved, Davy,\
that you should have such bad passions in your heart.\'92\
\
They had persuaded her that I was a wicked fellow, and she was more\
sorry for that than for my going away. I felt it sorely. I tried to eat\
my parting breakfast, but my tears dropped upon my bread-and-butter,\
and trickled into my tea. I saw my mother look at me sometimes, and then\
glance at the watchful Miss Murdstone, and than look down, or look away.\
\
\'91Master Copperfield\'92s box there!\'92 said Miss Murdstone, when wheels were\
heard at the gate.\
\
I looked for Peggotty, but it was not she; neither she nor Mr. Murdstone\
appeared. My former acquaintance, the carrier, was at the door. The box\
was taken out to his cart, and lifted in.\
\
\'91Clara!\'92 said Miss Murdstone, in her warning note.\
\
\'91Ready, my dear Jane,\'92 returned my mother. \'91Good-bye, Davy. You are\
going for your own good. Good-bye, my child. You will come home in the\
holidays, and be a better boy.\'92\
\
\'91Clara!\'92 Miss Murdstone repeated.\
\
\'91Certainly, my dear Jane,\'92 replied my mother, who was holding me. \'91I\
forgive you, my dear boy. God bless you!\'92\
\
\'91Clara!\'92 Miss Murdstone repeated.\
\
Miss Murdstone was good enough to take me out to the cart, and to say on\
the way that she hoped I would repent, before I came to a bad end; and\
then I got into the cart, and the lazy horse walked off with it.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 5. I AM SENT AWAY FROM HOME\
\
\
We might have gone about half a mile, and my pocket-handkerchief was\
quite wet through, when the carrier stopped short. Looking out to\
ascertain for what, I saw, to My amazement, Peggotty burst from a hedge\
and climb into the cart. She took me in both her arms, and squeezed me\
to her stays until the pressure on my nose was extremely painful, though\
I never thought of that till afterwards when I found it very tender. Not\
a single word did Peggotty speak. Releasing one of her arms, she put\
it down in her pocket to the elbow, and brought out some paper bags of\
cakes which she crammed into my pockets, and a purse which she put into\
my hand, but not one word did she say. After another and a final squeeze\
with both arms, she got down from the cart and ran away; and, my belief\
is, and has always been, without a solitary button on her gown. I\
picked up one, of several that were rolling about, and treasured it as a\
keepsake for a long time.\
\
The carrier looked at me, as if to inquire if she were coming back. I\
shook my head, and said I thought not. \'91Then come up,\'92 said the carrier\
to the lazy horse; who came up accordingly.\
\
Having by this time cried as much as I possibly could, I began to think\
it was of no use crying any more, especially as neither Roderick Random,\
nor that Captain in the Royal British Navy, had ever cried, that I\
could remember, in trying situations. The carrier, seeing me in this\
resolution, proposed that my pocket-handkerchief should be spread upon\
the horse\'92s back to dry. I thanked him, and assented; and particularly\
small it looked, under those circumstances.\
\
I had now leisure to examine the purse. It was a stiff leather purse,\
with a snap, and had three bright shillings in it, which Peggotty had\
evidently polished up with whitening, for my greater delight. But its\
most precious contents were two half-crowns folded together in a bit\
of paper, on which was written, in my mother\'92s hand, \'91For Davy. With my\
love.\'92 I was so overcome by this, that I asked the carrier to be so good\
as to reach me my pocket-handkerchief again; but he said he thought I\
had better do without it, and I thought I really had, so I wiped my eyes\
on my sleeve and stopped myself.\
\
For good, too; though, in consequence of my previous emotions, I was\
still occasionally seized with a stormy sob. After we had jogged on for\
some little time, I asked the carrier if he was going all the way.\
\
\'91All the way where?\'92 inquired the carrier.\
\
\'91There,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Where\'92s there?\'92 inquired the carrier.\
\
\'91Near London,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Why that horse,\'92 said the carrier, jerking the rein to point him out,\
\'91would be deader than pork afore he got over half the ground.\'92\
\
\'91Are you only going to Yarmouth then?\'92 I asked.\
\
\'91That\'92s about it,\'92 said the carrier. \'91And there I shall take you to the\
stage-cutch, and the stage-cutch that\'92ll take you to--wherever it is.\'92\
\
As this was a great deal for the carrier (whose name was Mr. Barkis)\
to say--he being, as I observed in a former chapter, of a phlegmatic\
temperament, and not at all conversational--I offered him a cake as a\
mark of attention, which he ate at one gulp, exactly like an elephant,\
and which made no more impression on his big face than it would have\
done on an elephant\'92s.\
\
\'91Did SHE make \'91em, now?\'92 said Mr. Barkis, always leaning forward, in his\
slouching way, on the footboard of the cart with an arm on each knee.\
\
\'91Peggotty, do you mean, sir?\'92\
\
\'91Ah!\'92 said Mr. Barkis. \'91Her.\'92\
\
\'91Yes. She makes all our pastry, and does all our cooking.\'92\
\
\'91Do she though?\'92 said Mr. Barkis. He made up his mouth as if to whistle,\
but he didn\'92t whistle. He sat looking at the horse\'92s ears, as if he saw\
something new there; and sat so, for a considerable time. By and by, he\
said:\
\
\'91No sweethearts, I b\'92lieve?\'92\
\
\'91Sweetmeats did you say, Mr. Barkis?\'92 For I thought he wanted\
something else to eat, and had pointedly alluded to that description of\
refreshment.\
\
\'91Hearts,\'92 said Mr. Barkis. \'91Sweet hearts; no person walks with her!\'92\
\
\'91With Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91Ah!\'92 he said. \'91Her.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, no. She never had a sweetheart.\'92\
\
\'91Didn\'92t she, though!\'92 said Mr. Barkis.\
\
Again he made up his mouth to whistle, and again he didn\'92t whistle, but\
sat looking at the horse\'92s ears.\
\
\'91So she makes,\'92 said Mr. Barkis, after a long interval of reflection,\
\'91all the apple parsties, and doos all the cooking, do she?\'92\
\
I replied that such was the fact.\
\
\'91Well. I\'92ll tell you what,\'92 said Mr. Barkis. \'91P\'92raps you might be\
writin\'92 to her?\'92\
\
\'91I shall certainly write to her,\'92 I rejoined.\
\
\'91Ah!\'92 he said, slowly turning his eyes towards me. \'91Well! If you was\
writin\'92 to her, p\'92raps you\'92d recollect to say that Barkis was willin\'92;\
would you?\'92\
\
\'91That Barkis is willing,\'92 I repeated, innocently. \'91Is that all the\
message?\'92\
\
\'91Ye-es,\'92 he said, considering. \'91Ye-es. Barkis is willin\'92.\'92\
\
\'91But you will be at Blunderstone again tomorrow, Mr. Barkis,\'92 I said,\
faltering a little at the idea of my being far away from it then, and\
could give your own message so much better.\'92\
\
As he repudiated this suggestion, however, with a jerk of his head,\
and once more confirmed his previous request by saying, with profound\
gravity, \'91Barkis is willin\'92. That\'92s the message,\'92 I readily undertook\
its transmission. While I was waiting for the coach in the hotel\
at Yarmouth that very afternoon, I procured a sheet of paper and\
an inkstand, and wrote a note to Peggotty, which ran thus: \'91My dear\
Peggotty. I have come here safe. Barkis is willing. My love to mama.\
Yours affectionately. P.S. He says he particularly wants you to\
know--BARKIS IS WILLING.\'92\
\
When I had taken this commission on myself prospectively, Mr. Barkis\
relapsed into perfect silence; and I, feeling quite worn out by all that\
had happened lately, lay down on a sack in the cart and fell asleep. I\
slept soundly until we got to Yarmouth; which was so entirely new\
and strange to me in the inn-yard to which we drove, that I at once\
abandoned a latent hope I had had of meeting with some of Mr. Peggotty\'92s\
family there, perhaps even with little Em\'92ly herself.\
\
The coach was in the yard, shining very much all over, but without any\
horses to it as yet; and it looked in that state as if nothing was\
more unlikely than its ever going to London. I was thinking this, and\
wondering what would ultimately become of my box, which Mr. Barkis had\
put down on the yard-pavement by the pole (he having driven up the yard\
to turn his cart), and also what would ultimately become of me, when a\
lady looked out of a bow-window where some fowls and joints of meat were\
hanging up, and said:\
\
\'91Is that the little gentleman from Blunderstone?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, ma\'92am,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91What name?\'92 inquired the lady.\
\
\'91Copperfield, ma\'92am,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91That won\'92t do,\'92 returned the lady. \'91Nobody\'92s dinner is paid for here,\
in that name.\'92\
\
\'91Is it Murdstone, ma\'92am?\'92 I said.\
\
\'91If you\'92re Master Murdstone,\'92 said the lady, \'91why do you go and give\
another name, first?\'92\
\
I explained to the lady how it was, who than rang a bell, and called\
out, \'91William! show the coffee-room!\'92 upon which a waiter came running\
out of a kitchen on the opposite side of the yard to show it, and seemed\
a good deal surprised when he was only to show it to me.\
\
It was a large long room with some large maps in it. I doubt if I could\
have felt much stranger if the maps had been real foreign countries, and\
I cast away in the middle of them. I felt it was taking a liberty to\
sit down, with my cap in my hand, on the corner of the chair nearest the\
door; and when the waiter laid a cloth on purpose for me, and put a set\
of castors on it, I think I must have turned red all over with modesty.\
\
He brought me some chops, and vegetables, and took the covers off in\
such a bouncing manner that I was afraid I must have given him some\
offence. But he greatly relieved my mind by putting a chair for me at\
the table, and saying, very affably, \'91Now, six-foot! come on!\'92\
\
I thanked him, and took my seat at the board; but found it extremely\
difficult to handle my knife and fork with anything like dexterity,\
or to avoid splashing myself with the gravy, while he was standing\
opposite, staring so hard, and making me blush in the most dreadful\
manner every time I caught his eye. After watching me into the second\
chop, he said:\
\
\'91There\'92s half a pint of ale for you. Will you have it now?\'92\
\
I thanked him and said, \'91Yes.\'92 Upon which he poured it out of a jug\
into a large tumbler, and held it up against the light, and made it look\
beautiful.\
\
\'91My eye!\'92 he said. \'91It seems a good deal, don\'92t it?\'92\
\
\'91It does seem a good deal,\'92 I answered with a smile. For it was quite\
delightful to me, to find him so pleasant. He was a twinkling-eyed,\
pimple-faced man, with his hair standing upright all over his head; and\
as he stood with one arm a-kimbo, holding up the glass to the light with\
the other hand, he looked quite friendly.\
\
\'91There was a gentleman here, yesterday,\'92 he said--\'91a stout gentleman, by\
the name of Topsawyer--perhaps you know him?\'92\
\
\'91No,\'92 I said, \'91I don\'92t think--\'92\
\
\'91In breeches and gaiters, broad-brimmed hat, grey coat, speckled\
choker,\'92 said the waiter.\
\
\'91No,\'92 I said bashfully, \'91I haven\'92t the pleasure--\'92\
\
\'91He came in here,\'92 said the waiter, looking at the light through the\
tumbler, \'91ordered a glass of this ale--WOULD order it--I told him\
not--drank it, and fell dead. It was too old for him. It oughtn\'92t to be\
drawn; that\'92s the fact.\'92\
\
I was very much shocked to hear of this melancholy accident, and said I\
thought I had better have some water.\
\
\'91Why you see,\'92 said the waiter, still looking at the light through the\
tumbler, with one of his eyes shut up, \'91our people don\'92t like things\
being ordered and left. It offends \'91em. But I\'92ll drink it, if you like.\
I\'92m used to it, and use is everything. I don\'92t think it\'92ll hurt me, if I\
throw my head back, and take it off quick. Shall I?\'92\
\
I replied that he would much oblige me by drinking it, if he thought\
he could do it safely, but by no means otherwise. When he did throw his\
head back, and take it off quick, I had a horrible fear, I confess,\
of seeing him meet the fate of the lamented Mr. Topsawyer, and fall\
lifeless on the carpet. But it didn\'92t hurt him. On the contrary, I\
thought he seemed the fresher for it.\
\
\'91What have we got here?\'92 he said, putting a fork into my dish. \'91Not\
chops?\'92\
\
\'91Chops,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Lord bless my soul!\'92 he exclaimed, \'91I didn\'92t know they were chops. Why,\
a chop\'92s the very thing to take off the bad effects of that beer! Ain\'92t\
it lucky?\'92\
\
So he took a chop by the bone in one hand, and a potato in the other,\
and ate away with a very good appetite, to my extreme satisfaction.\
He afterwards took another chop, and another potato; and after that,\
another chop and another potato. When we had done, he brought me a\
pudding, and having set it before me, seemed to ruminate, and to become\
absent in his mind for some moments.\
\
\'91How\'92s the pie?\'92 he said, rousing himself.\
\
\'91It\'92s a pudding,\'92 I made answer.\
\
\'91Pudding!\'92 he exclaimed. \'91Why, bless me, so it is! What!\'92 looking at it\
nearer. \'91You don\'92t mean to say it\'92s a batter-pudding!\'92\
\
\'91Yes, it is indeed.\'92\
\
\'91Why, a batter-pudding,\'92 he said, taking up a table-spoon, \'91is my\
favourite pudding! Ain\'92t that lucky? Come on, little \'91un, and let\'92s see\
who\'92ll get most.\'92\
\
The waiter certainly got most. He entreated me more than once to come in\
and win, but what with his table-spoon to my tea-spoon, his dispatch to\
my dispatch, and his appetite to my appetite, I was left far behind at\
the first mouthful, and had no chance with him. I never saw anyone enjoy\
a pudding so much, I think; and he laughed, when it was all gone, as if\
his enjoyment of it lasted still.\
\
Finding him so very friendly and companionable, it was then that I asked\
for the pen and ink and paper, to write to Peggotty. He not only brought\
it immediately, but was good enough to look over me while I wrote the\
letter. When I had finished it, he asked me where I was going to school.\
\
I said, \'91Near London,\'92 which was all I knew.\
\
\'91Oh! my eye!\'92 he said, looking very low-spirited, \'91I am sorry for that.\'92\
\
\'91Why?\'92 I asked him.\
\
\'91Oh, Lord!\'92 he said, shaking his head, \'91that\'92s the school where they\
broke the boy\'92s ribs--two ribs--a little boy he was. I should say he\
was--let me see--how old are you, about?\'92\
\
I told him between eight and nine.\
\
\'91That\'92s just his age,\'92 he said. \'91He was eight years and six months old\
when they broke his first rib; eight years and eight months old when\
they broke his second, and did for him.\'92\
\
I could not disguise from myself, or from the waiter, that this was an\
uncomfortable coincidence, and inquired how it was done. His answer was\
not cheering to my spirits, for it consisted of two dismal words, \'91With\
whopping.\'92\
\
The blowing of the coach-horn in the yard was a seasonable diversion,\
which made me get up and hesitatingly inquire, in the mingled pride and\
diffidence of having a purse (which I took out of my pocket), if there\
were anything to pay.\
\
\'91There\'92s a sheet of letter-paper,\'92 he returned. \'91Did you ever buy a\
sheet of letter-paper?\'92\
\
I could not remember that I ever had.\
\
\'91It\'92s dear,\'92 he said, \'91on account of the duty. Threepence. That\'92s\
the way we\'92re taxed in this country. There\'92s nothing else, except the\
waiter. Never mind the ink. I lose by that.\'92\
\
\'91What should you--what should I--how much ought I to--what would it be\
right to pay the waiter, if you please?\'92 I stammered, blushing.\
\
\'91If I hadn\'92t a family, and that family hadn\'92t the cowpock,\'92 said the\
waiter, \'91I wouldn\'92t take a sixpence. If I didn\'92t support a aged pairint,\
and a lovely sister,\'92--here the waiter was greatly agitated--\'91I wouldn\'92t\
take a farthing. If I had a good place, and was treated well here, I\
should beg acceptance of a trifle, instead of taking of it. But I live\
on broken wittles--and I sleep on the coals\'92--here the waiter burst into\
tears.\
\
I was very much concerned for his misfortunes, and felt that any\
recognition short of ninepence would be mere brutality and hardness of\
heart. Therefore I gave him one of my three bright shillings, which he\
received with much humility and veneration, and spun up with his thumb,\
directly afterwards, to try the goodness of.\
\
It was a little disconcerting to me, to find, when I was being helped\
up behind the coach, that I was supposed to have eaten all the dinner\
without any assistance. I discovered this, from overhearing the lady in\
the bow-window say to the guard, \'91Take care of that child, George, or\
he\'92ll burst!\'92 and from observing that the women-servants who were about\
the place came out to look and giggle at me as a young phenomenon. My\
unfortunate friend the waiter, who had quite recovered his spirits, did\
not appear to be disturbed by this, but joined in the general admiration\
without being at all confused. If I had any doubt of him, I suppose\
this half awakened it; but I am inclined to believe that with the simple\
confidence of a child, and the natural reliance of a child upon superior\
years (qualities I am very sorry any children should prematurely change\
for worldly wisdom), I had no serious mistrust of him on the whole, even\
then.\
\
I felt it rather hard, I must own, to be made, without deserving it, the\
subject of jokes between the coachman and guard as to the coach drawing\
heavy behind, on account of my sitting there, and as to the greater\
expediency of my travelling by waggon. The story of my supposed appetite\
getting wind among the outside passengers, they were merry upon it\
likewise; and asked me whether I was going to be paid for, at school,\
as two brothers or three, and whether I was contracted for, or went upon\
the regular terms; with other pleasant questions. But the worst of\
it was, that I knew I should be ashamed to eat anything, when an\
opportunity offered, and that, after a rather light dinner, I should\
remain hungry all night--for I had left my cakes behind, at the hotel,\
in my hurry. My apprehensions were realized. When we stopped for supper\
I couldn\'92t muster courage to take any, though I should have liked it\
very much, but sat by the fire and said I didn\'92t want anything. This did\
not save me from more jokes, either; for a husky-voiced gentleman with\
a rough face, who had been eating out of a sandwich-box nearly all the\
way, except when he had been drinking out of a bottle, said I was like\
a boa-constrictor who took enough at one meal to last him a long time;\
after which, he actually brought a rash out upon himself with boiled\
beef.\
\
We had started from Yarmouth at three o\'92clock in the afternoon, and we\
were due in London about eight next morning. It was Mid-summer weather,\
and the evening was very pleasant. When we passed through a village, I\
pictured to myself what the insides of the houses were like, and what\
the inhabitants were about; and when boys came running after us, and\
got up behind and swung there for a little way, I wondered whether their\
fathers were alive, and whether they were happy at home. I had plenty to\
think of, therefore, besides my mind running continually on the kind\
of place I was going to--which was an awful speculation. Sometimes, I\
remember, I resigned myself to thoughts of home and Peggotty; and to\
endeavouring, in a confused blind way, to recall how I had felt, and\
what sort of boy I used to be, before I bit Mr. Murdstone: which I\
couldn\'92t satisfy myself about by any means, I seemed to have bitten him\
in such a remote antiquity.\
\
The night was not so pleasant as the evening, for it got chilly; and\
being put between two gentlemen (the rough-faced one and another) to\
prevent my tumbling off the coach, I was nearly smothered by their\
falling asleep, and completely blocking me up. They squeezed me so hard\
sometimes, that I could not help crying out, \'91Oh! If you please!\'92--which\
they didn\'92t like at all, because it woke them. Opposite me was an\
elderly lady in a great fur cloak, who looked in the dark more like a\
haystack than a lady, she was wrapped up to such a degree. This lady had\
a basket with her, and she hadn\'92t known what to do with it, for a long\
time, until she found that on account of my legs being short, it could\
go underneath me. It cramped and hurt me so, that it made me perfectly\
miserable; but if I moved in the least, and made a glass that was in the\
basket rattle against something else (as it was sure to do), she gave\
me the cruellest poke with her foot, and said, \'91Come, don\'92t YOU fidget.\
YOUR bones are young enough, I\'92m sure!\'92\
\
At last the sun rose, and then my companions seemed to sleep easier.\
The difficulties under which they had laboured all night, and which had\
found utterance in the most terrific gasps and snorts, are not to be\
conceived. As the sun got higher, their sleep became lighter, and so\
they gradually one by one awoke. I recollect being very much surprised\
by the feint everybody made, then, of not having been to sleep at all,\
and by the uncommon indignation with which everyone repelled the\
charge. I labour under the same kind of astonishment to this day, having\
invariably observed that of all human weaknesses, the one to which our\
common nature is the least disposed to confess (I cannot imagine why) is\
the weakness of having gone to sleep in a coach.\
\
What an amazing place London was to me when I saw it in the distance,\
and how I believed all the adventures of all my favourite heroes to be\
constantly enacting and re-enacting there, and how I vaguely made it\
out in my own mind to be fuller of wonders and wickedness than all the\
cities of the earth, I need not stop here to relate. We approached it by\
degrees, and got, in due time, to the inn in the Whitechapel district,\
for which we were bound. I forget whether it was the Blue Bull, or the\
Blue Boar; but I know it was the Blue Something, and that its likeness\
was painted up on the back of the coach.\
\
The guard\'92s eye lighted on me as he was getting down, and he said at the\
booking-office door:\
\
\'91Is there anybody here for a yoongster booked in the name of Murdstone,\
from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, to be left till called for?\'92\
\
Nobody answered.\
\
\'91Try Copperfield, if you please, sir,\'92 said I, looking helplessly down.\
\
\'91Is there anybody here for a yoongster, booked in the name of Murdstone,\
from Bloonderstone, Sooffolk, but owning to the name of Copperfield, to\
be left till called for?\'92 said the guard. \'91Come! IS there anybody?\'92\
\
No. There was nobody. I looked anxiously around; but the inquiry made no\
impression on any of the bystanders, if I except a man in gaiters, with\
one eye, who suggested that they had better put a brass collar round my\
neck, and tie me up in the stable.\
\
A ladder was brought, and I got down after the lady, who was like a\
haystack: not daring to stir, until her basket was removed. The coach\
was clear of passengers by that time, the luggage was very soon cleared\
out, the horses had been taken out before the luggage, and now the coach\
itself was wheeled and backed off by some hostlers, out of the way.\
Still, nobody appeared, to claim the dusty youngster from Blunderstone,\
Suffolk.\
\
More solitary than Robinson Crusoe, who had nobody to look at him\
and see that he was solitary, I went into the booking-office, and, by\
invitation of the clerk on duty, passed behind the counter, and sat down\
on the scale at which they weighed the luggage. Here, as I sat looking\
at the parcels, packages, and books, and inhaling the smell of stables\
(ever since associated with that morning), a procession of most\
tremendous considerations began to march through my mind. Supposing\
nobody should ever fetch me, how long would they consent to keep me\
there? Would they keep me long enough to spend seven shillings? Should I\
sleep at night in one of those wooden bins, with the other luggage,\
and wash myself at the pump in the yard in the morning; or should I\
be turned out every night, and expected to come again to be left till\
called for, when the office opened next day? Supposing there was no\
mistake in the case, and Mr. Murdstone had devised this plan to get rid\
of me, what should I do? If they allowed me to remain there until my\
seven shillings were spent, I couldn\'92t hope to remain there when I began\
to starve. That would obviously be inconvenient and unpleasant to the\
customers, besides entailing on the Blue Whatever-it-was, the risk of\
funeral expenses. If I started off at once, and tried to walk back home,\
how could I ever find my way, how could I ever hope to walk so far, how\
could I make sure of anyone but Peggotty, even if I got back? If I\
found out the nearest proper authorities, and offered myself to go for a\
soldier, or a sailor, I was such a little fellow that it was most likely\
they wouldn\'92t take me in. These thoughts, and a hundred other such\
thoughts, turned me burning hot, and made me giddy with apprehension and\
dismay. I was in the height of my fever when a man entered and whispered\
to the clerk, who presently slanted me off the scale, and pushed me over\
to him, as if I were weighed, bought, delivered, and paid for.\
\
As I went out of the office, hand in hand with this new acquaintance,\
I stole a look at him. He was a gaunt, sallow young man, with hollow\
cheeks, and a chin almost as black as Mr. Murdstone\'92s; but there the\
likeness ended, for his whiskers were shaved off, and his hair, instead\
of being glossy, was rusty and dry. He was dressed in a suit of black\
clothes which were rather rusty and dry too, and rather short in the\
sleeves and legs; and he had a white neck-kerchief on, that was not\
over-clean. I did not, and do not, suppose that this neck-kerchief was\
all the linen he wore, but it was all he showed or gave any hint of.\
\
\'91You\'92re the new boy?\'92 he said. \'91Yes, sir,\'92 I said.\
\
I supposed I was. I didn\'92t know.\
\
\'91I\'92m one of the masters at Salem House,\'92 he said.\
\
I made him a bow and felt very much overawed. I was so ashamed to allude\
to a commonplace thing like my box, to a scholar and a master at Salem\
House, that we had gone some little distance from the yard before I had\
the hardihood to mention it. We turned back, on my humbly insinuating\
that it might be useful to me hereafter; and he told the clerk that the\
carrier had instructions to call for it at noon.\
\
\'91If you please, sir,\'92 I said, when we had accomplished about the same\
distance as before, \'91is it far?\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s down by Blackheath,\'92 he said.\
\
\'91Is that far, sir?\'92 I diffidently asked.\
\
\'91It\'92s a good step,\'92 he said. \'91We shall go by the stage-coach. It\'92s about\
six miles.\'92\
\
I was so faint and tired, that the idea of holding out for six miles\
more, was too much for me. I took heart to tell him that I had had\
nothing all night, and that if he would allow me to buy something to\
eat, I should be very much obliged to him. He appeared surprised at\
this--I see him stop and look at me now--and after considering for a few\
moments, said he wanted to call on an old person who lived not far off,\
and that the best way would be for me to buy some bread, or whatever I\
liked best that was wholesome, and make my breakfast at her house, where\
we could get some milk.\
\
Accordingly we looked in at a baker\'92s window, and after I had made a\
series of proposals to buy everything that was bilious in the shop, and\
he had rejected them one by one, we decided in favour of a nice little\
loaf of brown bread, which cost me threepence. Then, at a grocer\'92s shop,\
we bought an egg and a slice of streaky bacon; which still left what\
I thought a good deal of change, out of the second of the bright\
shillings, and made me consider London a very cheap place. These\
provisions laid in, we went on through a great noise and uproar that\
confused my weary head beyond description, and over a bridge which, no\
doubt, was London Bridge (indeed I think he told me so, but I was half\
asleep), until we came to the poor person\'92s house, which was a part of\
some alms-houses, as I knew by their look, and by an inscription on a\
stone over the gate which said they were established for twenty-five\
poor women.\
\
The Master at Salem House lifted the latch of one of a number of little\
black doors that were all alike, and had each a little diamond-paned\
window on one side, and another little diamond--paned window above; and\
we went into the little house of one of these poor old women, who was\
blowing a fire to make a little saucepan boil. On seeing the master\
enter, the old woman stopped with the bellows on her knee, and said\
something that I thought sounded like \'91My Charley!\'92 but on seeing me\
come in too, she got up, and rubbing her hands made a confused sort of\
half curtsey.\
\
\'91Can you cook this young gentleman\'92s breakfast for him, if you please?\'92\
said the Master at Salem House.\
\
\'91Can I?\'92 said the old woman. \'91Yes can I, sure!\'92\
\
\'91How\'92s Mrs. Fibbitson today?\'92 said the Master, looking at another old\
woman in a large chair by the fire, who was such a bundle of clothes\
that I feel grateful to this hour for not having sat upon her by\
mistake.\
\
\'91Ah, she\'92s poorly,\'92 said the first old woman. \'91It\'92s one of her bad days.\
If the fire was to go out, through any accident, I verily believe she\'92d\
go out too, and never come to life again.\'92\
\
As they looked at her, I looked at her also. Although it was a warm day,\
she seemed to think of nothing but the fire. I fancied she was jealous\
even of the saucepan on it; and I have reason to know that she took its\
impressment into the service of boiling my egg and broiling my bacon, in\
dudgeon; for I saw her, with my own discomfited eyes, shake her fist at\
me once, when those culinary operations were going on, and no one else\
was looking. The sun streamed in at the little window, but she sat with\
her own back and the back of the large chair towards it, screening the\
fire as if she were sedulously keeping IT warm, instead of it keeping\
her warm, and watching it in a most distrustful manner. The completion\
of the preparations for my breakfast, by relieving the fire, gave her\
such extreme joy that she laughed aloud--and a very unmelodious laugh\
she had, I must say.\
\
I sat down to my brown loaf, my egg, and my rasher of bacon, with a\
basin of milk besides, and made a most delicious meal. While I was yet\
in the full enjoyment of it, the old woman of the house said to the\
Master:\
\
\'91Have you got your flute with you?\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 he returned.\
\
\'91Have a blow at it,\'92 said the old woman, coaxingly. \'91Do!\'92\
\
The Master, upon this, put his hand underneath the skirts of his coat,\
and brought out his flute in three pieces, which he screwed together,\
and began immediately to play. My impression is, after many years of\
consideration, that there never can have been anybody in the world who\
played worse. He made the most dismal sounds I have ever heard produced\
by any means, natural or artificial. I don\'92t know what the tunes\
were--if there were such things in the performance at all, which I\
doubt--but the influence of the strain upon me was, first, to make me\
think of all my sorrows until I could hardly keep my tears back; then to\
take away my appetite; and lastly, to make me so sleepy that I couldn\'92t\
keep my eyes open. They begin to close again, and I begin to nod, as the\
recollection rises fresh upon me. Once more the little room, with its\
open corner cupboard, and its square-backed chairs, and its angular\
little staircase leading to the room above, and its three peacock\'92s\
feathers displayed over the mantelpiece--I remember wondering when I\
first went in, what that peacock would have thought if he had known what\
his finery was doomed to come to--fades from before me, and I nod, and\
sleep. The flute becomes inaudible, the wheels of the coach are heard\
instead, and I am on my journey. The coach jolts, I wake with a start,\
and the flute has come back again, and the Master at Salem House is\
sitting with his legs crossed, playing it dolefully, while the old woman\
of the house looks on delighted. She fades in her turn, and he fades,\
and all fades, and there is no flute, no Master, no Salem House, no\
David Copperfield, no anything but heavy sleep.\
\
I dreamed, I thought, that once while he was blowing into this dismal\
flute, the old woman of the house, who had gone nearer and nearer to him\
in her ecstatic admiration, leaned over the back of his chair and gave\
him an affectionate squeeze round the neck, which stopped his playing\
for a moment. I was in the middle state between sleeping and waking,\
either then or immediately afterwards; for, as he resumed--it was a real\
fact that he had stopped playing--I saw and heard the same old woman ask\
Mrs. Fibbitson if it wasn\'92t delicious (meaning the flute), to which Mrs.\
Fibbitson replied, \'91Ay, ay! yes!\'92 and nodded at the fire: to which, I am\
persuaded, she gave the credit of the whole performance.\
\
When I seemed to have been dozing a long while, the Master at Salem\
House unscrewed his flute into the three pieces, put them up as before,\
and took me away. We found the coach very near at hand, and got upon the\
roof; but I was so dead sleepy, that when we stopped on the road to take\
up somebody else, they put me inside where there were no passengers, and\
where I slept profoundly, until I found the coach going at a footpace up\
a steep hill among green leaves. Presently, it stopped, and had come to\
its destination.\
\
A short walk brought us--I mean the Master and me--to Salem House, which\
was enclosed with a high brick wall, and looked very dull. Over a door\
in this wall was a board with SALEM HOUSE upon it; and through a grating\
in this door we were surveyed when we rang the bell by a surly face,\
which I found, on the door being opened, belonged to a stout man with a\
bull-neck, a wooden leg, overhanging temples, and his hair cut close all\
round his head.\
\
\'91The new boy,\'92 said the Master.\
\
The man with the wooden leg eyed me all over--it didn\'92t take long, for\
there was not much of me--and locked the gate behind us, and took out\
the key. We were going up to the house, among some dark heavy trees,\
when he called after my conductor. \'91Hallo!\'92\
\
We looked back, and he was standing at the door of a little lodge, where\
he lived, with a pair of boots in his hand.\
\
\'91Here! The cobbler\'92s been,\'92 he said, \'91since you\'92ve been out, Mr. Mell,\
and he says he can\'92t mend \'91em any more. He says there ain\'92t a bit of the\
original boot left, and he wonders you expect it.\'92\
\
With these words he threw the boots towards Mr. Mell, who went back a\
few paces to pick them up, and looked at them (very disconsolately,\
I was afraid), as we went on together. I observed then, for the first\
time, that the boots he had on were a good deal the worse for wear, and\
that his stocking was just breaking out in one place, like a bud.\
\
Salem House was a square brick building with wings; of a bare and\
unfurnished appearance. All about it was so very quiet, that I said to\
Mr. Mell I supposed the boys were out; but he seemed surprised at my\
not knowing that it was holiday-time. That all the boys were at their\
several homes. That Mr. Creakle, the proprietor, was down by the\
sea-side with Mrs. and Miss Creakle; and that I was sent in holiday-time\
as a punishment for my misdoing, all of which he explained to me as we\
went along.\
\
I gazed upon the schoolroom into which he took me, as the most forlorn\
and desolate place I had ever seen. I see it now. A long room with three\
long rows of desks, and six of forms, and bristling all round with pegs\
for hats and slates. Scraps of old copy-books and exercises litter the\
dirty floor. Some silkworms\'92 houses, made of the same materials, are\
scattered over the desks. Two miserable little white mice, left behind\
by their owner, are running up and down in a fusty castle made of\
pasteboard and wire, looking in all the corners with their red eyes\
for anything to eat. A bird, in a cage very little bigger than himself,\
makes a mournful rattle now and then in hopping on his perch, two inches\
high, or dropping from it; but neither sings nor chirps. There is a\
strange unwholesome smell upon the room, like mildewed corduroys, sweet\
apples wanting air, and rotten books. There could not well be more ink\
splashed about it, if it had been roofless from its first construction,\
and the skies had rained, snowed, hailed, and blown ink through the\
varying seasons of the year.\
\
Mr. Mell having left me while he took his irreparable boots upstairs, I\
went softly to the upper end of the room, observing all this as I crept\
along. Suddenly I came upon a pasteboard placard, beautifully written,\
which was lying on the desk, and bore these words: \'91TAKE CARE OF HIM. HE\
BITES.\'92\
\
I got upon the desk immediately, apprehensive of at least a great dog\
underneath. But, though I looked all round with anxious eyes, I could\
see nothing of him. I was still engaged in peering about, when Mr. Mell\
came back, and asked me what I did up there?\
\
\'91I beg your pardon, sir,\'92 says I, \'91if you please, I\'92m looking for the\
dog.\'92\
\
\'91Dog?\'92 he says. \'91What dog?\'92\
\
\'91Isn\'92t it a dog, sir?\'92\
\
\'91Isn\'92t what a dog?\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s to be taken care of, sir; that bites.\'92\
\
\'91No, Copperfield,\'92 says he, gravely, \'91that\'92s not a dog. That\'92s a boy.\
My instructions are, Copperfield, to put this placard on your back. I am\
sorry to make such a beginning with you, but I must do it.\'92 With that he\
took me down, and tied the placard, which was neatly constructed for\
the purpose, on my shoulders like a knapsack; and wherever I went,\
afterwards, I had the consolation of carrying it.\
\
What I suffered from that placard, nobody can imagine. Whether it was\
possible for people to see me or not, I always fancied that somebody was\
reading it. It was no relief to turn round and find nobody; for wherever\
my back was, there I imagined somebody always to be. That cruel man with\
the wooden leg aggravated my sufferings. He was in authority; and if he\
ever saw me leaning against a tree, or a wall, or the house, he roared\
out from his lodge door in a stupendous voice, \'91Hallo, you sir! You\
Copperfield! Show that badge conspicuous, or I\'92ll report you!\'92 The\
playground was a bare gravelled yard, open to all the back of the house\
and the offices; and I knew that the servants read it, and the butcher\
read it, and the baker read it; that everybody, in a word, who came\
backwards and forwards to the house, of a morning when I was ordered to\
walk there, read that I was to be taken care of, for I bit, I recollect\
that I positively began to have a dread of myself, as a kind of wild boy\
who did bite.\
\
There was an old door in this playground, on which the boys had a\
custom of carving their names. It was completely covered with such\
inscriptions. In my dread of the end of the vacation and their coming\
back, I could not read a boy\'92s name, without inquiring in what tone and\
with what emphasis HE would read, \'91Take care of him. He bites.\'92 There\
was one boy--a certain J. Steerforth--who cut his name very deep and\
very often, who, I conceived, would read it in a rather strong voice,\
and afterwards pull my hair. There was another boy, one Tommy Traddles,\
who I dreaded would make game of it, and pretend to be dreadfully\
frightened of me. There was a third, George Demple, who I fancied would\
sing it. I have looked, a little shrinking creature, at that door, until\
the owners of all the names--there were five-and-forty of them in the\
school then, Mr. Mell said--seemed to send me to Coventry by general\
acclamation, and to cry out, each in his own way, \'91Take care of him. He\
bites!\'92\
\
It was the same with the places at the desks and forms. It was the same\
with the groves of deserted bedsteads I peeped at, on my way to, and\
when I was in, my own bed. I remember dreaming night after night, of\
being with my mother as she used to be, or of going to a party at Mr.\
Peggotty\'92s, or of travelling outside the stage-coach, or of dining again\
with my unfortunate friend the waiter, and in all these circumstances\
making people scream and stare, by the unhappy disclosure that I had\
nothing on but my little night-shirt, and that placard.\
\
In the monotony of my life, and in my constant apprehension of the\
re-opening of the school, it was such an insupportable affliction! I had\
long tasks every day to do with Mr. Mell; but I did them, there being\
no Mr. and Miss Murdstone here, and got through them without disgrace.\
Before, and after them, I walked about--supervised, as I have mentioned,\
by the man with the wooden leg. How vividly I call to mind the damp\
about the house, the green cracked flagstones in the court, an old leaky\
water-butt, and the discoloured trunks of some of the grim trees, which\
seemed to have dripped more in the rain than other trees, and to have\
blown less in the sun! At one we dined, Mr. Mell and I, at the upper end\
of a long bare dining-room, full of deal tables, and smelling of fat.\
Then, we had more tasks until tea, which Mr. Mell drank out of a blue\
teacup, and I out of a tin pot. All day long, and until seven or eight\
in the evening, Mr. Mell, at his own detached desk in the schoolroom,\
worked hard with pen, ink, ruler, books, and writing-paper, making out\
the bills (as I found) for last half-year. When he had put up his things\
for the night he took out his flute, and blew at it, until I almost\
thought he would gradually blow his whole being into the large hole at\
the top, and ooze away at the keys.\
\
I picture my small self in the dimly-lighted rooms, sitting with my\
head upon my hand, listening to the doleful performance of Mr. Mell,\
and conning tomorrow\'92s lessons. I picture myself with my books shut up,\
still listening to the doleful performance of Mr. Mell, and listening\
through it to what used to be at home, and to the blowing of the wind\
on Yarmouth flats, and feeling very sad and solitary. I picture myself\
going up to bed, among the unused rooms, and sitting on my bed-side\
crying for a comfortable word from Peggotty. I picture myself coming\
downstairs in the morning, and looking through a long ghastly gash of a\
staircase window at the school-bell hanging on the top of an out-house\
with a weathercock above it; and dreading the time when it shall ring J.\
Steerforth and the rest to work: which is only second, in my foreboding\
apprehensions, to the time when the man with the wooden leg shall unlock\
the rusty gate to give admission to the awful Mr. Creakle. I cannot\
think I was a very dangerous character in any of these aspects, but in\
all of them I carried the same warning on my back.\
\
Mr. Mell never said much to me, but he was never harsh to me. I suppose\
we were company to each other, without talking. I forgot to mention that\
he would talk to himself sometimes, and grin, and clench his fist, and\
grind his teeth, and pull his hair in an unaccountable manner. But he\
had these peculiarities: and at first they frightened me, though I soon\
got used to them.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 6. I ENLARGE MY CIRCLE OF ACQUAINTANCE\
\
\
I HAD led this life about a month, when the man with the wooden leg\
began to stump about with a mop and a bucket of water, from which I\
inferred that preparations were making to receive Mr. Creakle and the\
boys. I was not mistaken; for the mop came into the schoolroom before\
long, and turned out Mr. Mell and me, who lived where we could, and got\
on how we could, for some days, during which we were always in the way\
of two or three young women, who had rarely shown themselves before, and\
were so continually in the midst of dust that I sneezed almost as much\
as if Salem House had been a great snuff-box.\
\
One day I was informed by Mr. Mell that Mr. Creakle would be home that\
evening. In the evening, after tea, I heard that he was come. Before\
bedtime, I was fetched by the man with the wooden leg to appear before\
him.\
\
Mr. Creakle\'92s part of the house was a good deal more comfortable than\
ours, and he had a snug bit of garden that looked pleasant after the\
dusty playground, which was such a desert in miniature, that I thought\
no one but a camel, or a dromedary, could have felt at home in it. It\
seemed to me a bold thing even to take notice that the passage looked\
comfortable, as I went on my way, trembling, to Mr. Creakle\'92s presence:\
which so abashed me, when I was ushered into it, that I hardly saw\
Mrs. Creakle or Miss Creakle (who were both there, in the parlour), or\
anything but Mr. Creakle, a stout gentleman with a bunch of watch-chain\
and seals, in an arm-chair, with a tumbler and bottle beside him.\
\
\'91So!\'92 said Mr. Creakle. \'91This is the young gentleman whose teeth are to\
be filed! Turn him round.\'92\
\
The wooden-legged man turned me about so as to exhibit the placard; and\
having afforded time for a full survey of it, turned me about again,\
with my face to Mr. Creakle, and posted himself at Mr. Creakle\'92s side.\
Mr. Creakle\'92s face was fiery, and his eyes were small, and deep in his\
head; he had thick veins in his forehead, a little nose, and a large\
chin. He was bald on the top of his head; and had some thin wet-looking\
hair that was just turning grey, brushed across each temple, so that\
the two sides interlaced on his forehead. But the circumstance about\
him which impressed me most, was, that he had no voice, but spoke in a\
whisper. The exertion this cost him, or the consciousness of talking in\
that feeble way, made his angry face so much more angry, and his thick\
veins so much thicker, when he spoke, that I am not surprised, on\
looking back, at this peculiarity striking me as his chief one. \'91Now,\'92\
said Mr. Creakle. \'91What\'92s the report of this boy?\'92\
\
\'91There\'92s nothing against him yet,\'92 returned the man with the wooden leg.\
\'91There has been no opportunity.\'92\
\
I thought Mr. Creakle was disappointed. I thought Mrs. and Miss Creakle\
(at whom I now glanced for the first time, and who were, both, thin and\
quiet) were not disappointed.\
\
\'91Come here, sir!\'92 said Mr. Creakle, beckoning to me.\
\
\'91Come here!\'92 said the man with the wooden leg, repeating the gesture.\
\
\'91I have the happiness of knowing your father-in-law,\'92 whispered Mr.\
Creakle, taking me by the ear; \'91and a worthy man he is, and a man of\
a strong character. He knows me, and I know him. Do YOU know me? Hey?\'92\
said Mr. Creakle, pinching my ear with ferocious playfulness.\
\
\'91Not yet, sir,\'92 I said, flinching with the pain.\
\
\'91Not yet? Hey?\'92 repeated Mr. Creakle. \'91But you will soon. Hey?\'92\
\
\'91You will soon. Hey?\'92 repeated the man with the wooden leg. I afterwards\
found that he generally acted, with his strong voice, as Mr. Creakle\'92s\
interpreter to the boys.\
\
I was very much frightened, and said, I hoped so, if he pleased. I felt,\
all this while, as if my ear were blazing; he pinched it so hard.\
\
\'91I\'92ll tell you what I am,\'92 whispered Mr. Creakle, letting it go at last,\
with a screw at parting that brought the water into my eyes. \'91I\'92m a\
Tartar.\'92\
\
\'91A Tartar,\'92 said the man with the wooden leg.\
\
\'91When I say I\'92ll do a thing, I do it,\'92 said Mr. Creakle; \'91and when I say\
I will have a thing done, I will have it done.\'92\
\
\'91--Will have a thing done, I will have it done,\'92 repeated the man with\
the wooden leg.\
\
\'91I am a determined character,\'92 said Mr. Creakle. \'91That\'92s what I am. I\
do my duty. That\'92s what I do. My flesh and blood\'92--he looked at Mrs.\
Creakle as he said this--\'91when it rises against me, is not my flesh\
and blood. I discard it. Has that fellow\'92--to the man with the wooden\
leg--\'91been here again?\'92\
\
\'91No,\'92 was the answer.\
\
\'91No,\'92 said Mr. Creakle. \'91He knows better. He knows me. Let him keep\
away. I say let him keep away,\'92 said Mr. Creakle, striking his hand upon\
the table, and looking at Mrs. Creakle, \'91for he knows me. Now you have\
begun to know me too, my young friend, and you may go. Take him away.\'92\
\
I was very glad to be ordered away, for Mrs. and Miss Creakle were both\
wiping their eyes, and I felt as uncomfortable for them as I did for\
myself. But I had a petition on my mind which concerned me so nearly,\
that I couldn\'92t help saying, though I wondered at my own courage:\
\
\'91If you please, sir--\'92\
\
Mr. Creakle whispered, \'91Hah! What\'92s this?\'92 and bent his eyes upon me, as\
if he would have burnt me up with them.\
\
\'91If you please, sir,\'92 I faltered, \'91if I might be allowed (I am very\
sorry indeed, sir, for what I did) to take this writing off, before the\
boys come back--\'92\
\
Whether Mr. Creakle was in earnest, or whether he only did it to\
frighten me, I don\'92t know, but he made a burst out of his chair, before\
which I precipitately retreated, without waiting for the escort of the\
man with the wooden leg, and never once stopped until I reached my own\
bedroom, where, finding I was not pursued, I went to bed, as it was\
time, and lay quaking, for a couple of hours.\
\
Next morning Mr. Sharp came back. Mr. Sharp was the first master, and\
superior to Mr. Mell. Mr. Mell took his meals with the boys, but\
Mr. Sharp dined and supped at Mr. Creakle\'92s table. He was a limp,\
delicate-looking gentleman, I thought, with a good deal of nose, and a\
way of carrying his head on one side, as if it were a little too heavy\
for him. His hair was very smooth and wavy; but I was informed by the\
very first boy who came back that it was a wig (a second-hand one HE\
said), and that Mr. Sharp went out every Saturday afternoon to get it\
curled.\
\
It was no other than Tommy Traddles who gave me this piece of\
intelligence. He was the first boy who returned. He introduced himself\
by informing me that I should find his name on the right-hand corner of\
the gate, over the top-bolt; upon that I said, \'91Traddles?\'92 to which he\
replied, \'91The same,\'92 and then he asked me for a full account of myself\
and family.\
\
It was a happy circumstance for me that Traddles came back first. He\
enjoyed my placard so much, that he saved me from the embarrassment of\
either disclosure or concealment, by presenting me to every other boy\
who came back, great or small, immediately on his arrival, in this form\
of introduction, \'91Look here! Here\'92s a game!\'92 Happily, too, the greater\
part of the boys came back low-spirited, and were not so boisterous at\
my expense as I had expected. Some of them certainly did dance about me\
like wild Indians, and the greater part could not resist the temptation\
of pretending that I was a dog, and patting and soothing me, lest I\
should bite, and saying, \'91Lie down, sir!\'92 and calling me Towzer. This\
was naturally confusing, among so many strangers, and cost me some\
tears, but on the whole it was much better than I had anticipated.\
\
I was not considered as being formally received into the school,\
however, until J. Steerforth arrived. Before this boy, who was\
reputed to be a great scholar, and was very good-looking, and at least\
half-a-dozen years my senior, I was carried as before a magistrate. He\
inquired, under a shed in the playground, into the particulars of my\
punishment, and was pleased to express his opinion that it was \'91a jolly\
shame\'92; for which I became bound to him ever afterwards.\
\
\'91What money have you got, Copperfield?\'92 he said, walking aside with\
me when he had disposed of my affair in these terms. I told him seven\
shillings.\
\
\'91You had better give it to me to take care of,\'92 he said. \'91At least, you\
can if you like. You needn\'92t if you don\'92t like.\'92\
\
I hastened to comply with his friendly suggestion, and opening\
Peggotty\'92s purse, turned it upside down into his hand.\
\
\'91Do you want to spend anything now?\'92 he asked me.\
\
\'91No thank you,\'92 I replied.\
\
\'91You can, if you like, you know,\'92 said Steerforth. \'91Say the word.\'92\
\
\'91No, thank you, sir,\'92 I repeated.\
\
\'91Perhaps you\'92d like to spend a couple of shillings or so, in a bottle of\
currant wine by and by, up in the bedroom?\'92 said Steerforth. \'91You belong\
to my bedroom, I find.\'92\
\
It certainly had not occurred to me before, but I said, Yes, I should\
like that.\
\
\'91Very good,\'92 said Steerforth. \'91You\'92ll be glad to spend another shilling\
or so, in almond cakes, I dare say?\'92\
\
I said, Yes, I should like that, too.\
\
\'91And another shilling or so in biscuits, and another in fruit, eh?\'92 said\
Steerforth. \'91I say, young Copperfield, you\'92re going it!\'92\
\
I smiled because he smiled, but I was a little troubled in my mind, too.\
\
\'91Well!\'92 said Steerforth. \'91We must make it stretch as far as we can;\
that\'92s all. I\'92ll do the best in my power for you. I can go out when I\
like, and I\'92ll smuggle the prog in.\'92 With these words he put the money\
in his pocket, and kindly told me not to make myself uneasy; he would\
take care it should be all right. He was as good as his word, if that\
were all right which I had a secret misgiving was nearly all wrong--for\
I feared it was a waste of my mother\'92s two half-crowns--though I had\
preserved the piece of paper they were wrapped in: which was a precious\
saving. When we went upstairs to bed, he produced the whole seven\
shillings\'92 worth, and laid it out on my bed in the moonlight, saying:\
\
\'91There you are, young Copperfield, and a royal spread you\'92ve got.\'92\
\
I couldn\'92t think of doing the honours of the feast, at my time of life,\
while he was by; my hand shook at the very thought of it. I begged him\
to do me the favour of presiding; and my request being seconded by the\
other boys who were in that room, he acceded to it, and sat upon my\
pillow, handing round the viands--with perfect fairness, I must say--and\
dispensing the currant wine in a little glass without a foot, which was\
his own property. As to me, I sat on his left hand, and the rest were\
grouped about us, on the nearest beds and on the floor.\
\
How well I recollect our sitting there, talking in whispers; or their\
talking, and my respectfully listening, I ought rather to say; the\
moonlight falling a little way into the room, through the window,\
painting a pale window on the floor, and the greater part of us in\
shadow, except when Steerforth dipped a match into a phosphorus-box,\
when he wanted to look for anything on the board, and shed a blue glare\
over us that was gone directly! A certain mysterious feeling, consequent\
on the darkness, the secrecy of the revel, and the whisper in which\
everything was said, steals over me again, and I listen to all they tell\
me with a vague feeling of solemnity and awe, which makes me glad that\
they are all so near, and frightens me (though I feign to laugh) when\
Traddles pretends to see a ghost in the corner.\
\
I heard all kinds of things about the school and all belonging to it.\
I heard that Mr. Creakle had not preferred his claim to being a Tartar\
without reason; that he was the sternest and most severe of masters;\
that he laid about him, right and left, every day of his life, charging\
in among the boys like a trooper, and slashing away, unmercifully. That\
he knew nothing himself, but the art of slashing, being more ignorant\
(J. Steerforth said) than the lowest boy in the school; that he had\
been, a good many years ago, a small hop-dealer in the Borough, and had\
taken to the schooling business after being bankrupt in hops, and making\
away with Mrs. Creakle\'92s money. With a good deal more of that sort,\
which I wondered how they knew.\
\
I heard that the man with the wooden leg, whose name was Tungay, was an\
obstinate barbarian who had formerly assisted in the hop business, but\
had come into the scholastic line with Mr. Creakle, in consequence,\
as was supposed among the boys, of his having broken his leg in Mr.\
Creakle\'92s service, and having done a deal of dishonest work for him,\
and knowing his secrets. I heard that with the single exception of Mr.\
Creakle, Tungay considered the whole establishment, masters and boys,\
as his natural enemies, and that the only delight of his life was to be\
sour and malicious. I heard that Mr. Creakle had a son, who had not been\
Tungay\'92s friend, and who, assisting in the school, had once held some\
remonstrance with his father on an occasion when its discipline was very\
cruelly exercised, and was supposed, besides, to have protested against\
his father\'92s usage of his mother. I heard that Mr. Creakle had turned\
him out of doors, in consequence; and that Mrs. and Miss Creakle had\
been in a sad way, ever since.\
\
But the greatest wonder that I heard of Mr. Creakle was, there being one\
boy in the school on whom he never ventured to lay a hand, and that\
boy being J. Steerforth. Steerforth himself confirmed this when it was\
stated, and said that he should like to begin to see him do it. On being\
asked by a mild boy (not me) how he would proceed if he did begin to see\
him do it, he dipped a match into his phosphorus-box on purpose to shed\
a glare over his reply, and said he would commence by knocking him down\
with a blow on the forehead from the seven-and-sixpenny ink-bottle\
that was always on the mantelpiece. We sat in the dark for some time,\
breathless.\
\
I heard that Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell were both supposed to be wretchedly\
paid; and that when there was hot and cold meat for dinner at Mr.\
Creakle\'92s table, Mr. Sharp was always expected to say he preferred cold;\
which was again corroborated by J. Steerforth, the only parlour-boarder.\
I heard that Mr. Sharp\'92s wig didn\'92t fit him; and that he needn\'92t be so\
\'91bounceable\'92--somebody else said \'91bumptious\'92--about it, because his own\
red hair was very plainly to be seen behind.\
\
I heard that one boy, who was a coal-merchant\'92s son, came as a set-off\
against the coal-bill, and was called, on that account, \'91Exchange or\
Barter\'92--a name selected from the arithmetic book as expressing this\
arrangement. I heard that the table beer was a robbery of parents, and\
the pudding an imposition. I heard that Miss Creakle was regarded by the\
school in general as being in love with Steerforth; and I am sure, as I\
sat in the dark, thinking of his nice voice, and his fine face, and his\
easy manner, and his curling hair, I thought it very likely. I heard\
that Mr. Mell was not a bad sort of fellow, but hadn\'92t a sixpence to\
bless himself with; and that there was no doubt that old Mrs. Mell, his\
mother, was as poor as job. I thought of my breakfast then, and what had\
sounded like \'91My Charley!\'92 but I was, I am glad to remember, as mute as\
a mouse about it.\
\
The hearing of all this, and a good deal more, outlasted the banquet\
some time. The greater part of the guests had gone to bed as soon as the\
eating and drinking were over; and we, who had remained whispering and\
listening half-undressed, at last betook ourselves to bed, too.\
\
\'91Good night, young Copperfield,\'92 said Steerforth. \'91I\'92ll take care of\
you.\'92 \'91You\'92re very kind,\'92 I gratefully returned. \'91I am very much obliged\
to you.\'92\
\
\'91You haven\'92t got a sister, have you?\'92 said Steerforth, yawning.\
\
\'91No,\'92 I answered.\
\
\'91That\'92s a pity,\'92 said Steerforth. \'91If you had had one, I should think\
she would have been a pretty, timid, little, bright-eyed sort of girl. I\
should have liked to know her. Good night, young Copperfield.\'92\
\
\'91Good night, sir,\'92 I replied.\
\
I thought of him very much after I went to bed, and raised myself,\
I recollect, to look at him where he lay in the moonlight, with his\
handsome face turned up, and his head reclining easily on his arm. He\
was a person of great power in my eyes; that was, of course, the reason\
of my mind running on him. No veiled future dimly glanced upon him in\
the moonbeams. There was no shadowy picture of his footsteps, in the\
garden that I dreamed of walking in all night.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 7. MY \'91FIRST HALF\'92 AT SALEM HOUSE\
\
\
School began in earnest next day. A profound impression was made\
upon me, I remember, by the roar of voices in the schoolroom suddenly\
becoming hushed as death when Mr. Creakle entered after breakfast, and\
stood in the doorway looking round upon us like a giant in a story-book\
surveying his captives.\
\
Tungay stood at Mr. Creakle\'92s elbow. He had no occasion, I thought,\
to cry out \'91Silence!\'92 so ferociously, for the boys were all struck\
speechless and motionless.\
\
Mr. Creakle was seen to speak, and Tungay was heard, to this effect.\
\
\'91Now, boys, this is a new half. Take care what you\'92re about, in this new\
half. Come fresh up to the lessons, I advise you, for I come fresh up\
to the punishment. I won\'92t flinch. It will be of no use your rubbing\
yourselves; you won\'92t rub the marks out that I shall give you. Now get\
to work, every boy!\'92\
\
When this dreadful exordium was over, and Tungay had stumped out again,\
Mr. Creakle came to where I sat, and told me that if I were famous for\
biting, he was famous for biting, too. He then showed me the cane, and\
asked me what I thought of THAT, for a tooth? Was it a sharp tooth, hey?\
Was it a double tooth, hey? Had it a deep prong, hey? Did it bite, hey?\
Did it bite? At every question he gave me a fleshy cut with it that made\
me writhe; so I was very soon made free of Salem House (as Steerforth\
said), and was very soon in tears also.\
\
Not that I mean to say these were special marks of distinction,\
which only I received. On the contrary, a large majority of the boys\
(especially the smaller ones) were visited with similar instances\
of notice, as Mr. Creakle made the round of the schoolroom. Half the\
establishment was writhing and crying, before the day\'92s work began; and\
how much of it had writhed and cried before the day\'92s work was over, I\
am really afraid to recollect, lest I should seem to exaggerate.\
\
I should think there never can have been a man who enjoyed his\
profession more than Mr. Creakle did. He had a delight in cutting at\
the boys, which was like the satisfaction of a craving appetite. I am\
confident that he couldn\'92t resist a chubby boy, especially; that there\
was a fascination in such a subject, which made him restless in his\
mind, until he had scored and marked him for the day. I was chubby\
myself, and ought to know. I am sure when I think of the fellow now, my\
blood rises against him with the disinterested indignation I should\
feel if I could have known all about him without having ever been in his\
power; but it rises hotly, because I know him to have been an incapable\
brute, who had no more right to be possessed of the great trust he held,\
than to be Lord High Admiral, or Commander-in-Chief--in either of\
which capacities it is probable that he would have done infinitely less\
mischief.\
\
Miserable little propitiators of a remorseless Idol, how abject we were\
to him! What a launch in life I think it now, on looking back, to be so\
mean and servile to a man of such parts and pretensions!\
\
Here I sit at the desk again, watching his eye--humbly watching his eye,\
as he rules a ciphering-book for another victim whose hands have just\
been flattened by that identical ruler, and who is trying to wipe the\
sting out with a pocket-handkerchief. I have plenty to do. I don\'92t watch\
his eye in idleness, but because I am morbidly attracted to it, in a\
dread desire to know what he will do next, and whether it will be my\
turn to suffer, or somebody else\'92s. A lane of small boys beyond me, with\
the same interest in his eye, watch it too. I think he knows it,\
though he pretends he don\'92t. He makes dreadful mouths as he rules the\
ciphering-book; and now he throws his eye sideways down our lane, and we\
all droop over our books and tremble. A moment afterwards we are again\
eyeing him. An unhappy culprit, found guilty of imperfect exercise,\
approaches at his command. The culprit falters excuses, and professes a\
determination to do better tomorrow. Mr. Creakle cuts a joke before he\
beats him, and we laugh at it,--miserable little dogs, we laugh, with\
our visages as white as ashes, and our hearts sinking into our boots.\
\
Here I sit at the desk again, on a drowsy summer afternoon. A buzz and\
hum go up around me, as if the boys were so many bluebottles. A cloggy\
sensation of the lukewarm fat of meat is upon me (we dined an hour or\
two ago), and my head is as heavy as so much lead. I would give the\
world to go to sleep. I sit with my eye on Mr. Creakle, blinking at him\
like a young owl; when sleep overpowers me for a minute, he still looms\
through my slumber, ruling those ciphering-books, until he softly comes\
behind me and wakes me to plainer perception of him, with a red ridge\
across my back.\
\
Here I am in the playground, with my eye still fascinated by him, though\
I can\'92t see him. The window at a little distance from which I know he is\
having his dinner, stands for him, and I eye that instead. If he shows\
his face near it, mine assumes an imploring and submissive expression.\
If he looks out through the glass, the boldest boy (Steerforth excepted)\
stops in the middle of a shout or yell, and becomes contemplative. One\
day, Traddles (the most unfortunate boy in the world) breaks that window\
accidentally, with a ball. I shudder at this moment with the tremendous\
sensation of seeing it done, and feeling that the ball has bounded on to\
Mr. Creakle\'92s sacred head.\
\
Poor Traddles! In a tight sky-blue suit that made his arms and legs like\
German sausages, or roly-poly puddings, he was the merriest and most\
miserable of all the boys. He was always being caned--I think he was\
caned every day that half-year, except one holiday Monday when he was\
only ruler\'92d on both hands--and was always going to write to his uncle\
about it, and never did. After laying his head on the desk for a little\
while, he would cheer up, somehow, begin to laugh again, and draw\
skeletons all over his slate, before his eyes were dry. I used at first\
to wonder what comfort Traddles found in drawing skeletons; and for some\
time looked upon him as a sort of hermit, who reminded himself by those\
symbols of mortality that caning couldn\'92t last for ever. But I believe\
he only did it because they were easy, and didn\'92t want any features.\
\
He was very honourable, Traddles was, and held it as a solemn duty\
in the boys to stand by one another. He suffered for this on several\
occasions; and particularly once, when Steerforth laughed in church,\
and the Beadle thought it was Traddles, and took him out. I see him now,\
going away in custody, despised by the congregation. He never said\
who was the real offender, though he smarted for it next day, and was\
imprisoned so many hours that he came forth with a whole churchyard-full\
of skeletons swarming all over his Latin Dictionary. But he had his\
reward. Steerforth said there was nothing of the sneak in Traddles, and\
we all felt that to be the highest praise. For my part, I could have\
gone through a good deal (though I was much less brave than Traddles,\
and nothing like so old) to have won such a recompense.\
\
To see Steerforth walk to church before us, arm-in-arm with Miss\
Creakle, was one of the great sights of my life. I didn\'92t think Miss\
Creakle equal to little Em\'92ly in point of beauty, and I didn\'92t love\
her (I didn\'92t dare); but I thought her a young lady of extraordinary\
attractions, and in point of gentility not to be surpassed. When\
Steerforth, in white trousers, carried her parasol for her, I felt proud\
to know him; and believed that she could not choose but adore him with\
all her heart. Mr. Sharp and Mr. Mell were both notable personages in my\
eyes; but Steerforth was to them what the sun was to two stars.\
\
Steerforth continued his protection of me, and proved a very useful\
friend; since nobody dared to annoy one whom he honoured with his\
countenance. He couldn\'92t--or at all events he didn\'92t--defend me from Mr.\
Creakle, who was very severe with me; but whenever I had been treated\
worse than usual, he always told me that I wanted a little of his pluck,\
and that he wouldn\'92t have stood it himself; which I felt he intended\
for encouragement, and considered to be very kind of him. There was one\
advantage, and only one that I know of, in Mr. Creakle\'92s severity. He\
found my placard in his way when he came up or down behind the form on\
which I sat, and wanted to make a cut at me in passing; for this reason\
it was soon taken off, and I saw it no more.\
\
An accidental circumstance cemented the intimacy between Steerforth\
and me, in a manner that inspired me with great pride and satisfaction,\
though it sometimes led to inconvenience. It happened on one occasion,\
when he was doing me the honour of talking to me in the playground, that\
I hazarded the observation that something or somebody--I forget what\
now--was like something or somebody in Peregrine Pickle. He said nothing\
at the time; but when I was going to bed at night, asked me if I had got\
that book?\
\
I told him no, and explained how it was that I had read it, and all\
those other books of which I have made mention.\
\
\'91And do you recollect them?\'92 Steerforth said.\
\
\'91Oh yes,\'92 I replied; I had a good memory, and I believed I recollected\
them very well.\
\
\'91Then I tell you what, young Copperfield,\'92 said Steerforth, \'91you\
shall tell \'91em to me. I can\'92t get to sleep very early at night, and I\
generally wake rather early in the morning. We\'92ll go over \'91em one after\
another. We\'92ll make some regular Arabian Nights of it.\'92\
\
I felt extremely flattered by this arrangement, and we commenced\
carrying it into execution that very evening. What ravages I committed\
on my favourite authors in the course of my interpretation of them, I am\
not in a condition to say, and should be very unwilling to know; but\
I had a profound faith in them, and I had, to the best of my belief,\
a simple, earnest manner of narrating what I did narrate; and these\
qualities went a long way.\
\
The drawback was, that I was often sleepy at night, or out of spirits\
and indisposed to resume the story; and then it was rather hard work,\
and it must be done; for to disappoint or to displease Steerforth was of\
course out of the question. In the morning, too, when I felt weary, and\
should have enjoyed another hour\'92s repose very much, it was a tiresome\
thing to be roused, like the Sultana Scheherazade, and forced into a\
long story before the getting-up bell rang; but Steerforth was resolute;\
and as he explained to me, in return, my sums and exercises, and\
anything in my tasks that was too hard for me, I was no loser by the\
transaction. Let me do myself justice, however. I was moved by no\
interested or selfish motive, nor was I moved by fear of him. I admired\
and loved him, and his approval was return enough. It was so precious to\
me that I look back on these trifles, now, with an aching heart.\
\
Steerforth was considerate, too; and showed his consideration, in\
one particular instance, in an unflinching manner that was a little\
tantalizing, I suspect, to poor Traddles and the rest. Peggotty\'92s\
promised letter--what a comfortable letter it was!--arrived before\
\'91the half\'92 was many weeks old; and with it a cake in a perfect nest\
of oranges, and two bottles of cowslip wine. This treasure, as in duty\
bound, I laid at the feet of Steerforth, and begged him to dispense.\
\
\'91Now, I\'92ll tell you what, young Copperfield,\'92 said he: \'91the wine shall\
be kept to wet your whistle when you are story-telling.\'92\
\
I blushed at the idea, and begged him, in my modesty, not to think of\
it. But he said he had observed I was sometimes hoarse--a little roopy\
was his exact expression--and it should be, every drop, devoted to the\
purpose he had mentioned. Accordingly, it was locked up in his box, and\
drawn off by himself in a phial, and administered to me through a\
piece of quill in the cork, when I was supposed to be in want of a\
restorative. Sometimes, to make it a more sovereign specific, he was so\
kind as to squeeze orange juice into it, or to stir it up with ginger,\
or dissolve a peppermint drop in it; and although I cannot assert that\
the flavour was improved by these experiments, or that it was exactly\
the compound one would have chosen for a stomachic, the last thing at\
night and the first thing in the morning, I drank it gratefully and was\
very sensible of his attention.\
\
We seem, to me, to have been months over Peregrine, and months more over\
the other stories. The institution never flagged for want of a story, I\
am certain; and the wine lasted out almost as well as the matter. Poor\
Traddles--I never think of that boy but with a strange disposition to\
laugh, and with tears in my eyes--was a sort of chorus, in general;\
and affected to be convulsed with mirth at the comic parts, and to be\
overcome with fear when there was any passage of an alarming character\
in the narrative. This rather put me out, very often. It was a great\
jest of his, I recollect, to pretend that he couldn\'92t keep his teeth\
from chattering, whenever mention was made of an Alguazill in connexion\
with the adventures of Gil Blas; and I remember that when Gil Blas met\
the captain of the robbers in Madrid, this unlucky joker counterfeited\
such an ague of terror, that he was overheard by Mr. Creakle, who\
was prowling about the passage, and handsomely flogged for disorderly\
conduct in the bedroom. Whatever I had within me that was romantic and\
dreamy, was encouraged by so much story-telling in the dark; and in that\
respect the pursuit may not have been very profitable to me. But the\
being cherished as a kind of plaything in my room, and the consciousness\
that this accomplishment of mine was bruited about among the boys, and\
attracted a good deal of notice to me though I was the youngest there,\
stimulated me to exertion. In a school carried on by sheer cruelty,\
whether it is presided over by a dunce or not, there is not likely to\
be much learnt. I believe our boys were, generally, as ignorant a set\
as any schoolboys in existence; they were too much troubled and knocked\
about to learn; they could no more do that to advantage, than any one\
can do anything to advantage in a life of constant misfortune, torment,\
and worry. But my little vanity, and Steerforth\'92s help, urged me on\
somehow; and without saving me from much, if anything, in the way of\
punishment, made me, for the time I was there, an exception to the\
general body, insomuch that I did steadily pick up some crumbs of\
knowledge.\
\
In this I was much assisted by Mr. Mell, who had a liking for me that\
I am grateful to remember. It always gave me pain to observe that\
Steerforth treated him with systematic disparagement, and seldom lost\
an occasion of wounding his feelings, or inducing others to do so.\
This troubled me the more for a long time, because I had soon told\
Steerforth, from whom I could no more keep such a secret, than I could\
keep a cake or any other tangible possession, about the two old women\
Mr. Mell had taken me to see; and I was always afraid that Steerforth\
would let it out, and twit him with it.\
\
We little thought, any one of us, I dare say, when I ate my breakfast\
that first morning, and went to sleep under the shadow of the peacock\'92s\
feathers to the sound of the flute, what consequences would come of the\
introduction into those alms-houses of my insignificant person. But the\
visit had its unforeseen consequences; and of a serious sort, too, in\
their way.\
\
One day when Mr. Creakle kept the house from indisposition, which\
naturally diffused a lively joy through the school, there was a good\
deal of noise in the course of the morning\'92s work. The great relief and\
satisfaction experienced by the boys made them difficult to manage; and\
though the dreaded Tungay brought his wooden leg in twice or thrice, and\
took notes of the principal offenders\'92 names, no great impression was\
made by it, as they were pretty sure of getting into trouble tomorrow,\
do what they would, and thought it wise, no doubt, to enjoy themselves\
today.\
\
It was, properly, a half-holiday; being Saturday. But as the noise in\
the playground would have disturbed Mr. Creakle, and the weather was\
not favourable for going out walking, we were ordered into school in the\
afternoon, and set some lighter tasks than usual, which were made for\
the occasion. It was the day of the week on which Mr. Sharp went out to\
get his wig curled; so Mr. Mell, who always did the drudgery, whatever\
it was, kept school by himself. If I could associate the idea of a bull\
or a bear with anyone so mild as Mr. Mell, I should think of him, in\
connexion with that afternoon when the uproar was at its height, as of\
one of those animals, baited by a thousand dogs. I recall him bending\
his aching head, supported on his bony hand, over the book on his desk,\
and wretchedly endeavouring to get on with his tiresome work, amidst an\
uproar that might have made the Speaker of the House of Commons giddy.\
Boys started in and out of their places, playing at puss in the corner\
with other boys; there were laughing boys, singing boys, talking boys,\
dancing boys, howling boys; boys shuffled with their feet, boys whirled\
about him, grinning, making faces, mimicking him behind his back and\
before his eyes; mimicking his poverty, his boots, his coat, his mother,\
everything belonging to him that they should have had consideration for.\
\
\'91Silence!\'92 cried Mr. Mell, suddenly rising up, and striking his desk\
with the book. \'91What does this mean! It\'92s impossible to bear it. It\'92s\
maddening. How can you do it to me, boys?\'92\
\
It was my book that he struck his desk with; and as I stood beside him,\
following his eye as it glanced round the room, I saw the boys all stop,\
some suddenly surprised, some half afraid, and some sorry perhaps.\
\
Steerforth\'92s place was at the bottom of the school, at the opposite end\
of the long room. He was lounging with his back against the wall, and\
his hands in his pockets, and looked at Mr. Mell with his mouth shut up\
as if he were whistling, when Mr. Mell looked at him.\
\
\'91Silence, Mr. Steerforth!\'92 said Mr. Mell.\
\
\'91Silence yourself,\'92 said Steerforth, turning red. \'91Whom are you talking\
to?\'92\
\
\'91Sit down,\'92 said Mr. Mell.\
\
\'91Sit down yourself,\'92 said Steerforth, \'91and mind your business.\'92\
\
There was a titter, and some applause; but Mr. Mell was so white, that\
silence immediately succeeded; and one boy, who had darted out behind\
him to imitate his mother again, changed his mind, and pretended to want\
a pen mended.\
\
\'91If you think, Steerforth,\'92 said Mr. Mell, \'91that I am not acquainted\
with the power you can establish over any mind here\'92--he laid his hand,\
without considering what he did (as I supposed), upon my head--\'91or that\
I have not observed you, within a few minutes, urging your juniors on to\
every sort of outrage against me, you are mistaken.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t give myself the trouble of thinking at all about you,\'92 said\
Steerforth, coolly; \'91so I\'92m not mistaken, as it happens.\'92\
\
\'91And when you make use of your position of favouritism here, sir,\'92\
pursued Mr. Mell, with his lip trembling very much, \'91to insult a\
gentleman--\'92\
\
\'91A what?--where is he?\'92 said Steerforth.\
\
Here somebody cried out, \'91Shame, J. Steerforth! Too bad!\'92 It was\
Traddles; whom Mr. Mell instantly discomfited by bidding him hold his\
tongue. --\'91To insult one who is not fortunate in life, sir, and who\
never gave you the least offence, and the many reasons for not insulting\
whom you are old enough and wise enough to understand,\'92 said Mr. Mell,\
with his lips trembling more and more, \'91you commit a mean and base\
action. You can sit down or stand up as you please, sir. Copperfield, go\
on.\'92\
\
\'91Young Copperfield,\'92 said Steerforth, coming forward up the room,\
\'91stop a bit. I tell you what, Mr. Mell, once for all. When you take the\
liberty of calling me mean or base, or anything of that sort, you are\
an impudent beggar. You are always a beggar, you know; but when you do\
that, you are an impudent beggar.\'92\
\
I am not clear whether he was going to strike Mr. Mell, or Mr. Mell was\
going to strike him, or there was any such intention on either side.\
I saw a rigidity come upon the whole school as if they had been turned\
into stone, and found Mr. Creakle in the midst of us, with Tungay at his\
side, and Mrs. and Miss Creakle looking in at the door as if they were\
frightened. Mr. Mell, with his elbows on his desk and his face in his\
hands, sat, for some moments, quite still.\
\
\'91Mr. Mell,\'92 said Mr. Creakle, shaking him by the arm; and his whisper\
was so audible now, that Tungay felt it unnecessary to repeat his words;\
\'91you have not forgotten yourself, I hope?\'92\
\
\'91No, sir, no,\'92 returned the Master, showing his face, and shaking his\
head, and rubbing his hands in great agitation. \'91No, sir. No. I have\
remembered myself, I--no, Mr. Creakle, I have not forgotten myself, I--I\
have remembered myself, sir. I--I--could wish you had remembered me a\
little sooner, Mr. Creakle. It--it--would have been more kind, sir, more\
just, sir. It would have saved me something, sir.\'92\
\
Mr. Creakle, looking hard at Mr. Mell, put his hand on Tungay\'92s\
shoulder, and got his feet upon the form close by, and sat upon the\
desk. After still looking hard at Mr. Mell from his throne, as he\
shook his head, and rubbed his hands, and remained in the same state of\
agitation, Mr. Creakle turned to Steerforth, and said:\
\
\'91Now, sir, as he don\'92t condescend to tell me, what is this?\'92\
\
Steerforth evaded the question for a little while; looking in scorn and\
anger on his opponent, and remaining silent. I could not help thinking\
even in that interval, I remember, what a noble fellow he was in\
appearance, and how homely and plain Mr. Mell looked opposed to him.\
\
\'91What did he mean by talking about favourites, then?\'92 said Steerforth at\
length.\
\
\'91Favourites?\'92 repeated Mr. Creakle, with the veins in his forehead\
swelling quickly. \'91Who talked about favourites?\'92\
\
\'91He did,\'92 said Steerforth.\
\
\'91And pray, what did you mean by that, sir?\'92 demanded Mr. Creakle,\
turning angrily on his assistant.\
\
\'91I meant, Mr. Creakle,\'92 he returned in a low voice, \'91as I said; that\
no pupil had a right to avail himself of his position of favouritism to\
degrade me.\'92\
\
\'91To degrade YOU?\'92 said Mr. Creakle. \'91My stars! But give me leave to ask\
you, Mr. What\'92s-your-name\'92; and here Mr. Creakle folded his arms, cane\
and all, upon his chest, and made such a knot of his brows that his\
little eyes were hardly visible below them; \'91whether, when you talk\
about favourites, you showed proper respect to me? To me, sir,\'92 said Mr.\
Creakle, darting his head at him suddenly, and drawing it back again,\
\'91the principal of this establishment, and your employer.\'92\
\
\'91It was not judicious, sir, I am willing to admit,\'92 said Mr. Mell. \'91I\
should not have done so, if I had been cool.\'92\
\
Here Steerforth struck in.\
\
\'91Then he said I was mean, and then he said I was base, and then I called\
him a beggar. If I had been cool, perhaps I shouldn\'92t have called him a\
beggar. But I did, and I am ready to take the consequences of it.\'92\
\
Without considering, perhaps, whether there were any consequences to\
be taken, I felt quite in a glow at this gallant speech. It made an\
impression on the boys too, for there was a low stir among them, though\
no one spoke a word.\
\
\'91I am surprised, Steerforth--although your candour does you honour,\'92\
said Mr. Creakle, \'91does you honour, certainly--I am surprised,\
Steerforth, I must say, that you should attach such an epithet to any\
person employed and paid in Salem House, sir.\'92\
\
Steerforth gave a short laugh.\
\
\'91That\'92s not an answer, sir,\'92 said Mr. Creakle, \'91to my remark. I expect\
more than that from you, Steerforth.\'92\
\
If Mr. Mell looked homely, in my eyes, before the handsome boy, it would\
be quite impossible to say how homely Mr. Creakle looked. \'91Let him deny\
it,\'92 said Steerforth.\
\
\'91Deny that he is a beggar, Steerforth?\'92 cried Mr. Creakle. \'91Why, where\
does he go a-begging?\'92\
\
\'91If he is not a beggar himself, his near relation\'92s one,\'92 said\
Steerforth. \'91It\'92s all the same.\'92\
\
He glanced at me, and Mr. Mell\'92s hand gently patted me upon the\
shoulder. I looked up with a flush upon my face and remorse in my heart,\
but Mr. Mell\'92s eyes were fixed on Steerforth. He continued to pat me\
kindly on the shoulder, but he looked at him.\
\
\'91Since you expect me, Mr. Creakle, to justify myself,\'92 said Steerforth,\
\'91and to say what I mean,--what I have to say is, that his mother lives\
on charity in an alms-house.\'92\
\
Mr. Mell still looked at him, and still patted me kindly on the\
shoulder, and said to himself, in a whisper, if I heard right: \'91Yes, I\
thought so.\'92\
\
Mr. Creakle turned to his assistant, with a severe frown and laboured\
politeness:\
\
\'91Now, you hear what this gentleman says, Mr. Mell. Have the goodness, if\
you please, to set him right before the assembled school.\'92\
\
\'91He is right, sir, without correction,\'92 returned Mr. Mell, in the midst\
of a dead silence; \'91what he has said is true.\'92\
\
\'91Be so good then as declare publicly, will you,\'92 said Mr. Creakle,\
putting his head on one side, and rolling his eyes round the school,\
\'91whether it ever came to my knowledge until this moment?\'92\
\
\'91I believe not directly,\'92 he returned.\
\
\'91Why, you know not,\'92 said Mr. Creakle. \'91Don\'92t you, man?\'92\
\
\'91I apprehend you never supposed my worldly circumstances to be very\
good,\'92 replied the assistant. \'91You know what my position is, and always\
has been, here.\'92\
\
\'91I apprehend, if you come to that,\'92 said Mr. Creakle, with his veins\
swelling again bigger than ever, \'91that you\'92ve been in a wrong position\
altogether, and mistook this for a charity school. Mr. Mell, we\'92ll part,\
if you please. The sooner the better.\'92\
\
\'91There is no time,\'92 answered Mr. Mell, rising, \'91like the present.\'92\
\
\'91Sir, to you!\'92 said Mr. Creakle.\
\
\'91I take my leave of you, Mr. Creakle, and all of you,\'92 said Mr. Mell,\
glancing round the room, and again patting me gently on the shoulders.\
\'91James Steerforth, the best wish I can leave you is that you may come to\
be ashamed of what you have done today. At present I would prefer to see\
you anything rather than a friend, to me, or to anyone in whom I feel an\
interest.\'92\
\
Once more he laid his hand upon my shoulder; and then taking his\
flute and a few books from his desk, and leaving the key in it for his\
successor, he went out of the school, with his property under his arm.\
Mr. Creakle then made a speech, through Tungay, in which he thanked\
Steerforth for asserting (though perhaps too warmly) the independence\
and respectability of Salem House; and which he wound up by shaking\
hands with Steerforth, while we gave three cheers--I did not quite know\
what for, but I supposed for Steerforth, and so joined in them ardently,\
though I felt miserable. Mr. Creakle then caned Tommy Traddles for\
being discovered in tears, instead of cheers, on account of Mr. Mell\'92s\
departure; and went back to his sofa, or his bed, or wherever he had\
come from.\
\
We were left to ourselves now, and looked very blank, I recollect, on\
one another. For myself, I felt so much self-reproach and contrition for\
my part in what had happened, that nothing would have enabled me to keep\
back my tears but the fear that Steerforth, who often looked at me, I\
saw, might think it unfriendly--or, I should rather say, considering our\
relative ages, and the feeling with which I regarded him, undutiful--if\
I showed the emotion which distressed me. He was very angry with\
Traddles, and said he was glad he had caught it.\
\
Poor Traddles, who had passed the stage of lying with his head upon the\
desk, and was relieving himself as usual with a burst of skeletons, said\
he didn\'92t care. Mr. Mell was ill-used.\
\
\'91Who has ill-used him, you girl?\'92 said Steerforth.\
\
\'91Why, you have,\'92 returned Traddles.\
\
\'91What have I done?\'92 said Steerforth.\
\
\'91What have you done?\'92 retorted Traddles. \'91Hurt his feelings, and lost\
him his situation.\'92\
\
\'91His feelings?\'92 repeated Steerforth disdainfully. \'91His feelings will\
soon get the better of it, I\'92ll be bound. His feelings are not like\
yours, Miss Traddles. As to his situation--which was a precious one,\
wasn\'92t it?--do you suppose I am not going to write home, and take care\
that he gets some money? Polly?\'92\
\
We thought this intention very noble in Steerforth, whose mother was\
a widow, and rich, and would do almost anything, it was said, that he\
asked her. We were all extremely glad to see Traddles so put down,\
and exalted Steerforth to the skies: especially when he told us, as he\
condescended to do, that what he had done had been done expressly for\
us, and for our cause; and that he had conferred a great boon upon us\
by unselfishly doing it. But I must say that when I was going on with a\
story in the dark that night, Mr. Mell\'92s old flute seemed more than once\
to sound mournfully in my ears; and that when at last Steerforth was\
tired, and I lay down in my bed, I fancied it playing so sorrowfully\
somewhere, that I was quite wretched.\
\
I soon forgot him in the contemplation of Steerforth, who, in an easy\
amateur way, and without any book (he seemed to me to know everything by\
heart), took some of his classes until a new master was found. The new\
master came from a grammar school; and before he entered on his duties,\
dined in the parlour one day, to be introduced to Steerforth. Steerforth\
approved of him highly, and told us he was a Brick. Without exactly\
understanding what learned distinction was meant by this, I respected\
him greatly for it, and had no doubt whatever of his superior knowledge:\
though he never took the pains with me--not that I was anybody--that Mr.\
Mell had taken.\
\
There was only one other event in this half-year, out of the daily\
school-life, that made an impression upon me which still survives. It\
survives for many reasons.\
\
One afternoon, when we were all harassed into a state of dire confusion,\
and Mr. Creakle was laying about him dreadfully, Tungay came in, and\
called out in his usual strong way: \'91Visitors for Copperfield!\'92\
\
A few words were interchanged between him and Mr. Creakle, as, who the\
visitors were, and what room they were to be shown into; and then I, who\
had, according to custom, stood up on the announcement being made, and\
felt quite faint with astonishment, was told to go by the back stairs\
and get a clean frill on, before I repaired to the dining-room. These\
orders I obeyed, in such a flutter and hurry of my young spirits as\
I had never known before; and when I got to the parlour door, and the\
thought came into my head that it might be my mother--I had only thought\
of Mr. or Miss Murdstone until then--I drew back my hand from the lock,\
and stopped to have a sob before I went in.\
\
At first I saw nobody; but feeling a pressure against the door, I looked\
round it, and there, to my amazement, were Mr. Peggotty and Ham, ducking\
at me with their hats, and squeezing one another against the wall. I\
could not help laughing; but it was much more in the pleasure of seeing\
them, than at the appearance they made. We shook hands in a very\
cordial way; and I laughed and laughed, until I pulled out my\
pocket-handkerchief and wiped my eyes.\
\
Mr. Peggotty (who never shut his mouth once, I remember, during the\
visit) showed great concern when he saw me do this, and nudged Ham to\
say something.\
\
\'91Cheer up, Mas\'92r Davy bor\'92!\'92 said Ham, in his simpering way. \'91Why, how\
you have growed!\'92\
\
\'91Am I grown?\'92 I said, drying my eyes. I was not crying at anything\
in particular that I know of; but somehow it made me cry, to see old\
friends.\
\
\'91Growed, Mas\'92r Davy bor\'92? Ain\'92t he growed!\'92 said Ham.\
\
\'91Ain\'92t he growed!\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
They made me laugh again by laughing at each other, and then we all\
three laughed until I was in danger of crying again.\
\
\'91Do you know how mama is, Mr. Peggotty?\'92 I said. \'91And how my dear, dear,\
old Peggotty is?\'92\
\
\'91Oncommon,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91And little Em\'92ly, and Mrs. Gummidge?\'92\
\
\'91On--common,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty.\
\
There was a silence. Mr. Peggotty, to relieve it, took two prodigious\
lobsters, and an enormous crab, and a large canvas bag of shrimps, out\
of his pockets, and piled them up in Ham\'92s arms.\
\
\'91You see,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, \'91knowing as you was partial to a little\
relish with your wittles when you was along with us, we took the\
liberty. The old Mawther biled \'91em, she did. Mrs. Gummidge biled \'91em.\
Yes,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, slowly, who I thought appeared to stick to the\
subject on account of having no other subject ready, \'91Mrs. Gummidge, I\
do assure you, she biled \'91em.\'92\
\
I expressed my thanks; and Mr. Peggotty, after looking at Ham, who stood\
smiling sheepishly over the shellfish, without making any attempt to\
help him, said:\
\
\'91We come, you see, the wind and tide making in our favour, in one of our\
Yarmouth lugs to Gravesen\'92. My sister she wrote to me the name of this\
here place, and wrote to me as if ever I chanced to come to Gravesen\'92,\
I was to come over and inquire for Mas\'92r Davy and give her dooty,\
humbly wishing him well and reporting of the fam\'92ly as they was oncommon\
toe-be-sure. Little Em\'92ly, you see, she\'92ll write to my sister when I go\
back, as I see you and as you was similarly oncommon, and so we make it\
quite a merry-go-rounder.\'92\
\
I was obliged to consider a little before I understood what Mr. Peggotty\
meant by this figure, expressive of a complete circle of intelligence. I\
then thanked him heartily; and said, with a consciousness of reddening,\
that I supposed little Em\'92ly was altered too, since we used to pick up\
shells and pebbles on the beach?\
\
\'91She\'92s getting to be a woman, that\'92s wot she\'92s getting to be,\'92 said Mr.\
Peggotty. \'91Ask HIM.\'92 He meant Ham, who beamed with delight and assent\
over the bag of shrimps.\
\
\'91Her pretty face!\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, with his own shining like a light.\
\
\'91Her learning!\'92 said Ham.\
\
\'91Her writing!\'92 said Mr. Peggotty. \'91Why it\'92s as black as jet! And so\
large it is, you might see it anywheres.\'92\
\
It was perfectly delightful to behold with what enthusiasm Mr. Peggotty\
became inspired when he thought of his little favourite. He stands\
before me again, his bluff hairy face irradiating with a joyful love and\
pride, for which I can find no description. His honest eyes fire up, and\
sparkle, as if their depths were stirred by something bright. His broad\
chest heaves with pleasure. His strong loose hands clench themselves,\
in his earnestness; and he emphasizes what he says with a right arm that\
shows, in my pigmy view, like a sledge-hammer.\
\
Ham was quite as earnest as he. I dare say they would have said much\
more about her, if they had not been abashed by the unexpected coming in\
of Steerforth, who, seeing me in a corner speaking with two strangers,\
stopped in a song he was singing, and said: \'91I didn\'92t know you were\
here, young Copperfield!\'92 (for it was not the usual visiting room) and\
crossed by us on his way out.\
\
I am not sure whether it was in the pride of having such a friend as\
Steerforth, or in the desire to explain to him how I came to have such a\
friend as Mr. Peggotty, that I called to him as he was going away. But I\
said, modestly--Good Heaven, how it all comes back to me this long time\
afterwards--!\
\
\'91Don\'92t go, Steerforth, if you please. These are two Yarmouth\
boatmen--very kind, good people--who are relations of my nurse, and have\
come from Gravesend to see me.\'92\
\
\'91Aye, aye?\'92 said Steerforth, returning. \'91I am glad to see them. How are\
you both?\'92\
\
There was an ease in his manner--a gay and light manner it was, but not\
swaggering--which I still believe to have borne a kind of enchantment\
with it. I still believe him, in virtue of this carriage, his animal\
spirits, his delightful voice, his handsome face and figure, and, for\
aught I know, of some inborn power of attraction besides (which I think\
a few people possess), to have carried a spell with him to which it was\
a natural weakness to yield, and which not many persons could withstand.\
I could not but see how pleased they were with him, and how they seemed\
to open their hearts to him in a moment.\
\
\'91You must let them know at home, if you please, Mr. Peggotty,\'92 I said,\
\'91when that letter is sent, that Mr. Steerforth is very kind to me, and\
that I don\'92t know what I should ever do here without him.\'92\
\
\'91Nonsense!\'92 said Steerforth, laughing. \'91You mustn\'92t tell them anything\
of the sort.\'92\
\
\'91And if Mr. Steerforth ever comes into Norfolk or Suffolk, Mr.\
Peggotty,\'92 I said, \'91while I am there, you may depend upon it I shall\
bring him to Yarmouth, if he will let me, to see your house. You never\
saw such a good house, Steerforth. It\'92s made out of a boat!\'92\
\
\'91Made out of a boat, is it?\'92 said Steerforth. \'91It\'92s the right sort of a\
house for such a thorough-built boatman.\'92\
\
\'91So \'91tis, sir, so \'91tis, sir,\'92 said Ham, grinning. \'91You\'92re right, young\
gen\'92l\'92m\'92n! Mas\'92r Davy bor\'92, gen\'92l\'92m\'92n\'92s right. A thorough-built boatman!\
Hor, hor! That\'92s what he is, too!\'92\
\
Mr. Peggotty was no less pleased than his nephew, though his modesty\
forbade him to claim a personal compliment so vociferously.\
\
\'91Well, sir,\'92 he said, bowing and chuckling, and tucking in the ends\
of his neckerchief at his breast: \'91I thankee, sir, I thankee! I do my\
endeavours in my line of life, sir.\'92\
\
\'91The best of men can do no more, Mr. Peggotty,\'92 said Steerforth. He had\
got his name already.\
\
\'91I\'92ll pound it, it\'92s wot you do yourself, sir,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty,\
shaking his head, \'91and wot you do well--right well! I thankee, sir. I\'92m\
obleeged to you, sir, for your welcoming manner of me. I\'92m rough, sir,\
but I\'92m ready--least ways, I hope I\'92m ready, you unnerstand. My house\
ain\'92t much for to see, sir, but it\'92s hearty at your service if ever you\
should come along with Mas\'92r Davy to see it. I\'92m a reg\'92lar Dodman,\
I am,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, by which he meant snail, and this was in\
allusion to his being slow to go, for he had attempted to go after every\
sentence, and had somehow or other come back again; \'91but I wish you both\
well, and I wish you happy!\'92\
\
Ham echoed this sentiment, and we parted with them in the heartiest\
manner. I was almost tempted that evening to tell Steerforth about\
pretty little Em\'92ly, but I was too timid of mentioning her name, and\
too much afraid of his laughing at me. I remember that I thought a good\
deal, and in an uneasy sort of way, about Mr. Peggotty having said that\
she was getting on to be a woman; but I decided that was nonsense.\
\
We transported the shellfish, or the \'91relish\'92 as Mr. Peggotty had\
modestly called it, up into our room unobserved, and made a great supper\
that evening. But Traddles couldn\'92t get happily out of it. He was too\
unfortunate even to come through a supper like anybody else. He was\
taken ill in the night--quite prostrate he was--in consequence of Crab;\
and after being drugged with black draughts and blue pills, to an extent\
which Demple (whose father was a doctor) said was enough to undermine\
a horse\'92s constitution, received a caning and six chapters of Greek\
Testament for refusing to confess.\
\
The rest of the half-year is a jumble in my recollection of the daily\
strife and struggle of our lives; of the waning summer and the changing\
season; of the frosty mornings when we were rung out of bed, and the\
cold, cold smell of the dark nights when we were rung into bed again; of\
the evening schoolroom dimly lighted and indifferently warmed, and the\
morning schoolroom which was nothing but a great shivering-machine; of\
the alternation of boiled beef with roast beef, and boiled mutton with\
roast mutton; of clods of bread-and-butter, dog\'92s-eared lesson-books,\
cracked slates, tear-blotted copy-books, canings, rulerings,\
hair-cuttings, rainy Sundays, suet-puddings, and a dirty atmosphere of\
ink, surrounding all.\
\
I well remember though, how the distant idea of the holidays, after\
seeming for an immense time to be a stationary speck, began to come\
towards us, and to grow and grow. How from counting months, we came to\
weeks, and then to days; and how I then began to be afraid that I should\
not be sent for and when I learnt from Steerforth that I had been sent\
for, and was certainly to go home, had dim forebodings that I might\
break my leg first. How the breaking-up day changed its place fast, at\
last, from the week after next to next week, this week, the day after\
tomorrow, tomorrow, today, tonight--when I was inside the Yarmouth mail,\
and going home.\
\
I had many a broken sleep inside the Yarmouth mail, and many an\
incoherent dream of all these things. But when I awoke at intervals, the\
ground outside the window was not the playground of Salem House, and the\
sound in my ears was not the sound of Mr. Creakle giving it to Traddles,\
but the sound of the coachman touching up the horses.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 8. MY HOLIDAYS. ESPECIALLY ONE HAPPY AFTERNOON\
\
\
When we arrived before day at the inn where the mail stopped, which was\
not the inn where my friend the waiter lived, I was shown up to a nice\
little bedroom, with DOLPHIN painted on the door. Very cold I was, I\
know, notwithstanding the hot tea they had given me before a large fire\
downstairs; and very glad I was to turn into the Dolphin\'92s bed, pull the\
Dolphin\'92s blankets round my head, and go to sleep.\
\
Mr. Barkis the carrier was to call for me in the morning at nine\
o\'92clock. I got up at eight, a little giddy from the shortness of my\
night\'92s rest, and was ready for him before the appointed time. He\
received me exactly as if not five minutes had elapsed since we were\
last together, and I had only been into the hotel to get change for\
sixpence, or something of that sort.\
\
As soon as I and my box were in the cart, and the carrier seated, the\
lazy horse walked away with us all at his accustomed pace.\
\
\'91You look very well, Mr. Barkis,\'92 I said, thinking he would like to know\
it.\
\
Mr. Barkis rubbed his cheek with his cuff, and then looked at his cuff\
as if he expected to find some of the bloom upon it; but made no other\
acknowledgement of the compliment.\
\
\'91I gave your message, Mr. Barkis,\'92 I said: \'91I wrote to Peggotty.\'92\
\
\'91Ah!\'92 said Mr. Barkis.\
\
Mr. Barkis seemed gruff, and answered drily.\
\
\'91Wasn\'92t it right, Mr. Barkis?\'92 I asked, after a little hesitation.\
\
\'91Why, no,\'92 said Mr. Barkis.\
\
\'91Not the message?\'92\
\
\'91The message was right enough, perhaps,\'92 said Mr. Barkis; \'91but it come\
to an end there.\'92\
\
Not understanding what he meant, I repeated inquisitively: \'91Came to an\
end, Mr. Barkis?\'92\
\
\'91Nothing come of it,\'92 he explained, looking at me sideways. \'91No answer.\'92\
\
\'91There was an answer expected, was there, Mr. Barkis?\'92 said I, opening\
my eyes. For this was a new light to me.\
\
\'91When a man says he\'92s willin\'92,\'92 said Mr. Barkis, turning his glance\
slowly on me again, \'91it\'92s as much as to say, that man\'92s a-waitin\'92 for a\
answer.\'92\
\
\'91Well, Mr. Barkis?\'92\
\
\'91Well,\'92 said Mr. Barkis, carrying his eyes back to his horse\'92s ears;\
\'91that man\'92s been a-waitin\'92 for a answer ever since.\'92\
\
\'91Have you told her so, Mr. Barkis?\'92\
\
\'91No--no,\'92 growled Mr. Barkis, reflecting about it. \'91I ain\'92t got no call\
to go and tell her so. I never said six words to her myself, I ain\'92t\
a-goin\'92 to tell her so.\'92\
\
\'91Would you like me to do it, Mr. Barkis?\'92 said I, doubtfully. \'91You might\
tell her, if you would,\'92 said Mr. Barkis, with another slow look at me,\
\'91that Barkis was a-waitin\'92 for a answer. Says you--what name is it?\'92\
\
\'91Her name?\'92\
\
\'91Ah!\'92 said Mr. Barkis, with a nod of his head.\
\
\'91Peggotty.\'92\
\
\'91Chrisen name? Or nat\'92ral name?\'92 said Mr. Barkis.\
\
\'91Oh, it\'92s not her Christian name. Her Christian name is Clara.\'92\
\
\'91Is it though?\'92 said Mr. Barkis.\
\
He seemed to find an immense fund of reflection in this circumstance,\
and sat pondering and inwardly whistling for some time.\
\
\'91Well!\'92 he resumed at length. \'91Says you, \'93Peggotty! Barkis is waitin\'92\
for a answer.\'94 Says she, perhaps, \'93Answer to what?\'94 Says you, \'93To what I\
told you.\'94 \'93What is that?\'94 says she. \'93Barkis is willin\'92,\'94 says you.\'92\
\
This extremely artful suggestion Mr. Barkis accompanied with a nudge\
of his elbow that gave me quite a stitch in my side. After that, he\
slouched over his horse in his usual manner; and made no other reference\
to the subject except, half an hour afterwards, taking a piece of chalk\
from his pocket, and writing up, inside the tilt of the cart, \'91Clara\
Peggotty\'92--apparently as a private memorandum.\
\
Ah, what a strange feeling it was to be going home when it was not home,\
and to find that every object I looked at, reminded me of the happy old\
home, which was like a dream I could never dream again! The days when my\
mother and I and Peggotty were all in all to one another, and there was\
no one to come between us, rose up before me so sorrowfully on the road,\
that I am not sure I was glad to be there--not sure but that I would\
rather have remained away, and forgotten it in Steerforth\'92s company. But\
there I was; and soon I was at our house, where the bare old elm-trees\
wrung their many hands in the bleak wintry air, and shreds of the old\
rooks\'92-nests drifted away upon the wind.\
\
The carrier put my box down at the garden-gate, and left me. I walked\
along the path towards the house, glancing at the windows, and fearing\
at every step to see Mr. Murdstone or Miss Murdstone lowering out of\
one of them. No face appeared, however; and being come to the house, and\
knowing how to open the door, before dark, without knocking, I went in\
with a quiet, timid step.\
\
God knows how infantine the memory may have been, that was awakened\
within me by the sound of my mother\'92s voice in the old parlour, when I\
set foot in the hall. She was singing in a low tone. I think I must have\
lain in her arms, and heard her singing so to me when I was but a baby.\
The strain was new to me, and yet it was so old that it filled my heart\
brim-full; like a friend come back from a long absence.\
\
I believed, from the solitary and thoughtful way in which my mother\
murmured her song, that she was alone. And I went softly into the room.\
She was sitting by the fire, suckling an infant, whose tiny hand she\
held against her neck. Her eyes were looking down upon its face, and she\
sat singing to it. I was so far right, that she had no other companion.\
\
I spoke to her, and she started, and cried out. But seeing me, she\
called me her dear Davy, her own boy! and coming half across the room\
to meet me, kneeled down upon the ground and kissed me, and laid my head\
down on her bosom near the little creature that was nestling there, and\
put its hand to my lips.\
\
I wish I had died. I wish I had died then, with that feeling in my\
heart! I should have been more fit for Heaven than I ever have been\
since.\
\
\'91He is your brother,\'92 said my mother, fondling me. \'91Davy, my pretty boy!\
My poor child!\'92 Then she kissed me more and more, and clasped me round\
the neck. This she was doing when Peggotty came running in, and bounced\
down on the ground beside us, and went mad about us both for a quarter\
of an hour.\
\
It seemed that I had not been expected so soon, the carrier being much\
before his usual time. It seemed, too, that Mr. and Miss Murdstone had\
gone out upon a visit in the neighbourhood, and would not return before\
night. I had never hoped for this. I had never thought it possible that\
we three could be together undisturbed, once more; and I felt, for the\
time, as if the old days were come back.\
\
We dined together by the fireside. Peggotty was in attendance to wait\
upon us, but my mother wouldn\'92t let her do it, and made her dine with\
us. I had my own old plate, with a brown view of a man-of-war in full\
sail upon it, which Peggotty had hoarded somewhere all the time I\
had been away, and would not have had broken, she said, for a hundred\
pounds. I had my own old mug with David on it, and my own old little\
knife and fork that wouldn\'92t cut.\
\
While we were at table, I thought it a favourable occasion to tell\
Peggotty about Mr. Barkis, who, before I had finished what I had to tell\
her, began to laugh, and throw her apron over her face.\
\
\'91Peggotty,\'92 said my mother. \'91What\'92s the matter?\'92\
\
Peggotty only laughed the more, and held her apron tight over her face\
when my mother tried to pull it away, and sat as if her head were in a\
bag.\
\
\'91What are you doing, you stupid creature?\'92 said my mother, laughing.\
\
\'91Oh, drat the man!\'92 cried Peggotty. \'91He wants to marry me.\'92\
\
\'91It would be a very good match for you; wouldn\'92t it?\'92 said my mother.\
\
\'91Oh! I don\'92t know,\'92 said Peggotty. \'91Don\'92t ask me. I wouldn\'92t have him if\
he was made of gold. Nor I wouldn\'92t have anybody.\'92\
\
\'91Then, why don\'92t you tell him so, you ridiculous thing?\'92 said my mother.\
\
\'91Tell him so,\'92 retorted Peggotty, looking out of her apron. \'91He has\
never said a word to me about it. He knows better. If he was to make so\
bold as say a word to me, I should slap his face.\'92\
\
Her own was as red as ever I saw it, or any other face, I think; but she\
only covered it again, for a few moments at a time, when she was taken\
with a violent fit of laughter; and after two or three of those attacks,\
went on with her dinner.\
\
I remarked that my mother, though she smiled when Peggotty looked at\
her, became more serious and thoughtful. I had seen at first that she\
was changed. Her face was very pretty still, but it looked careworn, and\
too delicate; and her hand was so thin and white that it seemed to me\
to be almost transparent. But the change to which I now refer was\
superadded to this: it was in her manner, which became anxious and\
fluttered. At last she said, putting out her hand, and laying it\
affectionately on the hand of her old servant,\
\
\'91Peggotty, dear, you are not going to be married?\'92\
\
\'91Me, ma\'92am?\'92 returned Peggotty, staring. \'91Lord bless you, no!\'92\
\
\'91Not just yet?\'92 said my mother, tenderly.\
\
\'91Never!\'92 cried Peggotty.\
\
My mother took her hand, and said:\
\
\'91Don\'92t leave me, Peggotty. Stay with me. It will not be for long,\
perhaps. What should I ever do without you!\'92\
\
\'91Me leave you, my precious!\'92 cried Peggotty. \'91Not for all the world and\
his wife. Why, what\'92s put that in your silly little head?\'92--For Peggotty\
had been used of old to talk to my mother sometimes like a child.\
\
But my mother made no answer, except to thank her, and Peggotty went\
running on in her own fashion.\
\
\'91Me leave you? I think I see myself. Peggotty go away from you? I should\
like to catch her at it! No, no, no,\'92 said Peggotty, shaking her head,\
and folding her arms; \'91not she, my dear. It isn\'92t that there ain\'92t some\
Cats that would be well enough pleased if she did, but they sha\'92n\'92t be\
pleased. They shall be aggravated. I\'92ll stay with you till I am a cross\
cranky old woman. And when I\'92m too deaf, and too lame, and too blind,\
and too mumbly for want of teeth, to be of any use at all, even to be\
found fault with, than I shall go to my Davy, and ask him to take me\
in.\'92\
\
\'91And, Peggotty,\'92 says I, \'91I shall be glad to see you, and I\'92ll make you\
as welcome as a queen.\'92\
\
\'91Bless your dear heart!\'92 cried Peggotty. \'91I know you will!\'92 And she\
kissed me beforehand, in grateful acknowledgement of my hospitality.\
After that, she covered her head up with her apron again and had another\
laugh about Mr. Barkis. After that, she took the baby out of its little\
cradle, and nursed it. After that, she cleared the dinner table;\
after that, came in with another cap on, and her work-box, and the\
yard-measure, and the bit of wax-candle, all just the same as ever.\
\
We sat round the fire, and talked delightfully. I told them what a hard\
master Mr. Creakle was, and they pitied me very much. I told them what a\
fine fellow Steerforth was, and what a patron of mine, and Peggotty said\
she would walk a score of miles to see him. I took the little baby in\
my arms when it was awake, and nursed it lovingly. When it was asleep\
again, I crept close to my mother\'92s side according to my old custom,\
broken now a long time, and sat with my arms embracing her waist, and my\
little red cheek on her shoulder, and once more felt her beautiful\
hair drooping over me--like an angel\'92s wing as I used to think, I\
recollect--and was very happy indeed.\
\
While I sat thus, looking at the fire, and seeing pictures in the\
red-hot coals, I almost believed that I had never been away; that Mr.\
and Miss Murdstone were such pictures, and would vanish when the fire\
got low; and that there was nothing real in all that I remembered, save\
my mother, Peggotty, and I.\
\
Peggotty darned away at a stocking as long as she could see, and then\
sat with it drawn on her left hand like a glove, and her needle in her\
right, ready to take another stitch whenever there was a blaze. I cannot\
conceive whose stockings they can have been that Peggotty was always\
darning, or where such an unfailing supply of stockings in want of\
darning can have come from. From my earliest infancy she seems to have\
been always employed in that class of needlework, and never by any\
chance in any other.\
\
\'91I wonder,\'92 said Peggotty, who was sometimes seized with a fit of\
wondering on some most unexpected topic, \'91what\'92s become of Davy\'92s\
great-aunt?\'92 \'91Lor, Peggotty!\'92 observed my mother, rousing herself from a\
reverie, \'91what nonsense you talk!\'92\
\
\'91Well, but I really do wonder, ma\'92am,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91What can have put such a person in your head?\'92 inquired my mother. \'91Is\
there nobody else in the world to come there?\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know how it is,\'92 said Peggotty, \'91unless it\'92s on account of\
being stupid, but my head never can pick and choose its people. They\
come and they go, and they don\'92t come and they don\'92t go, just as they\
like. I wonder what\'92s become of her?\'92\
\
\'91How absurd you are, Peggotty!\'92 returned my mother. \'91One would suppose\
you wanted a second visit from her.\'92\
\
\'91Lord forbid!\'92 cried Peggotty.\
\
\'91Well then, don\'92t talk about such uncomfortable things, there\'92s a good\
soul,\'92 said my mother. \'91Miss Betsey is shut up in her cottage by the\
sea, no doubt, and will remain there. At all events, she is not likely\
ever to trouble us again.\'92\
\
\'91No!\'92 mused Peggotty. \'91No, that ain\'92t likely at all.---I wonder, if she\
was to die, whether she\'92d leave Davy anything?\'92\
\
\'91Good gracious me, Peggotty,\'92 returned my mother, \'91what a nonsensical\
woman you are! when you know that she took offence at the poor dear\
boy\'92s ever being born at all.\'92\
\
\'91I suppose she wouldn\'92t be inclined to forgive him now,\'92 hinted\
Peggotty.\
\
\'91Why should she be inclined to forgive him now?\'92 said my mother, rather\
sharply.\
\
\'91Now that he\'92s got a brother, I mean,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
My mother immediately began to cry, and wondered how Peggotty dared to\
say such a thing.\
\
\'91As if this poor little innocent in its cradle had ever done any harm to\
you or anybody else, you jealous thing!\'92 said she. \'91You had much better\
go and marry Mr. Barkis, the carrier. Why don\'92t you?\'92\
\
\'91I should make Miss Murdstone happy, if I was to,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91What a bad disposition you have, Peggotty!\'92 returned my mother. \'91You\
are as jealous of Miss Murdstone as it is possible for a ridiculous\
creature to be. You want to keep the keys yourself, and give out all the\
things, I suppose? I shouldn\'92t be surprised if you did. When you know\
that she only does it out of kindness and the best intentions! You know\
she does, Peggotty--you know it well.\'92\
\
Peggotty muttered something to the effect of \'91Bother the best\
intentions!\'92 and something else to the effect that there was a little\
too much of the best intentions going on.\
\
\'91I know what you mean, you cross thing,\'92 said my mother. \'91I understand\
you, Peggotty, perfectly. You know I do, and I wonder you don\'92t colour\
up like fire. But one point at a time. Miss Murdstone is the point now,\
Peggotty, and you sha\'92n\'92t escape from it. Haven\'92t you heard her\
say, over and over again, that she thinks I am too thoughtless and\
too--a--a--\'92\
\
\'91Pretty,\'92 suggested Peggotty.\
\
\'91Well,\'92 returned my mother, half laughing, \'91and if she is so silly as to\
say so, can I be blamed for it?\'92\
\
\'91No one says you can,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91No, I should hope not, indeed!\'92 returned my mother. \'91Haven\'92t you heard\
her say, over and over again, that on this account she wished to spare\
me a great deal of trouble, which she thinks I am not suited for, and\
which I really don\'92t know myself that I AM suited for; and isn\'92t she up\
early and late, and going to and fro continually--and doesn\'92t she do\
all sorts of things, and grope into all sorts of places, coal-holes and\
pantries and I don\'92t know where, that can\'92t be very agreeable--and do\
you mean to insinuate that there is not a sort of devotion in that?\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t insinuate at all,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91You do, Peggotty,\'92 returned my mother. \'91You never do anything else,\
except your work. You are always insinuating. You revel in it. And when\
you talk of Mr. Murdstone\'92s good intentions--\'92\
\
\'91I never talked of \'91em,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91No, Peggotty,\'92 returned my mother, \'91but you insinuated. That\'92s what I\
told you just now. That\'92s the worst of you. You WILL insinuate. I said,\
at the moment, that I understood you, and you see I did. When you talk\
of Mr. Murdstone\'92s good intentions, and pretend to slight them (for I\
don\'92t believe you really do, in your heart, Peggotty), you must be as\
well convinced as I am how good they are, and how they actuate him in\
everything. If he seems to have been at all stern with a certain person,\
Peggotty--you understand, and so I am sure does Davy, that I am not\
alluding to anybody present--it is solely because he is satisfied that\
it is for a certain person\'92s benefit. He naturally loves a certain\
person, on my account; and acts solely for a certain person\'92s good. He\
is better able to judge of it than I am; for I very well know that I am\
a weak, light, girlish creature, and that he is a firm, grave, serious\
man. And he takes,\'92 said my mother, with the tears which were engendered\
in her affectionate nature, stealing down her face, \'91he takes great\
pains with me; and I ought to be very thankful to him, and very\
submissive to him even in my thoughts; and when I am not, Peggotty, I\
worry and condemn myself, and feel doubtful of my own heart, and don\'92t\
know what to do.\'92\
\
Peggotty sat with her chin on the foot of the stocking, looking silently\
at the fire.\
\
\'91There, Peggotty,\'92 said my mother, changing her tone, \'91don\'92t let us fall\
out with one another, for I couldn\'92t bear it. You are my true friend, I\
know, if I have any in the world. When I call you a ridiculous creature,\
or a vexatious thing, or anything of that sort, Peggotty, I only mean\
that you are my true friend, and always have been, ever since the night\
when Mr. Copperfield first brought me home here, and you came out to the\
gate to meet me.\'92\
\
Peggotty was not slow to respond, and ratify the treaty of friendship by\
giving me one of her best hugs. I think I had some glimpses of the real\
character of this conversation at the time; but I am sure, now, that\
the good creature originated it, and took her part in it, merely that\
my mother might comfort herself with the little contradictory summary in\
which she had indulged. The design was efficacious; for I remember that\
my mother seemed more at ease during the rest of the evening, and that\
Peggotty observed her less.\
\
When we had had our tea, and the ashes were thrown up, and the candles\
snuffed, I read Peggotty a chapter out of the Crocodile Book, in\
remembrance of old times--she took it out of her pocket: I don\'92t know\
whether she had kept it there ever since--and then we talked about Salem\
House, which brought me round again to Steerforth, who was my great\
subject. We were very happy; and that evening, as the last of its race,\
and destined evermore to close that volume of my life, will never pass\
out of my memory.\
\
It was almost ten o\'92clock before we heard the sound of wheels. We all\
got up then; and my mother said hurriedly that, as it was so late, and\
Mr. and Miss Murdstone approved of early hours for young people, perhaps\
I had better go to bed. I kissed her, and went upstairs with my candle\
directly, before they came in. It appeared to my childish fancy, as I\
ascended to the bedroom where I had been imprisoned, that they brought\
a cold blast of air into the house which blew away the old familiar\
feeling like a feather.\
\
I felt uncomfortable about going down to breakfast in the morning, as\
I had never set eyes on Mr. Murdstone since the day when I committed my\
memorable offence. However, as it must be done, I went down, after two\
or three false starts half-way, and as many runs back on tiptoe to my\
own room, and presented myself in the parlour.\
\
He was standing before the fire with his back to it, while Miss\
Murdstone made the tea. He looked at me steadily as I entered, but made\
no sign of recognition whatever. I went up to him, after a moment of\
confusion, and said: \'91I beg your pardon, sir. I am very sorry for what I\
did, and I hope you will forgive me.\'92\
\
\'91I am glad to hear you are sorry, David,\'92 he replied.\
\
The hand he gave me was the hand I had bitten. I could not restrain my\
eye from resting for an instant on a red spot upon it; but it was not so\
red as I turned, when I met that sinister expression in his face.\
\
\'91How do you do, ma\'92am?\'92 I said to Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91Ah, dear me!\'92 sighed Miss Murdstone, giving me the tea-caddy scoop\
instead of her fingers. \'91How long are the holidays?\'92\
\
\'91A month, ma\'92am.\'92\
\
\'91Counting from when?\'92\
\
\'91From today, ma\'92am.\'92\
\
\'91Oh!\'92 said Miss Murdstone. \'91Then here\'92s one day off.\'92\
\
She kept a calendar of the holidays in this way, and every morning\
checked a day off in exactly the same manner. She did it gloomily until\
she came to ten, but when she got into two figures she became more\
hopeful, and, as the time advanced, even jocular.\
\
It was on this very first day that I had the misfortune to throw her,\
though she was not subject to such weakness in general, into a state of\
violent consternation. I came into the room where she and my mother\
were sitting; and the baby (who was only a few weeks old) being on\
my mother\'92s lap, I took it very carefully in my arms. Suddenly Miss\
Murdstone gave such a scream that I all but dropped it.\
\
\'91My dear Jane!\'92 cried my mother.\
\
\'91Good heavens, Clara, do you see?\'92 exclaimed Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91See what, my dear Jane?\'92 said my mother; \'91where?\'92\
\
\'91He\'92s got it!\'92 cried Miss Murdstone. \'91The boy has got the baby!\'92\
\
She was limp with horror; but stiffened herself to make a dart at me,\
and take it out of my arms. Then, she turned faint; and was so very\
ill that they were obliged to give her cherry brandy. I was solemnly\
interdicted by her, on her recovery, from touching my brother any more\
on any pretence whatever; and my poor mother, who, I could see, wished\
otherwise, meekly confirmed the interdict, by saying: \'91No doubt you are\
right, my dear Jane.\'92\
\
On another occasion, when we three were together, this same dear\
baby--it was truly dear to me, for our mother\'92s sake--was the innocent\
occasion of Miss Murdstone\'92s going into a passion. My mother, who had\
been looking at its eyes as it lay upon her lap, said:\
\
\'91Davy! come here!\'92 and looked at mine.\
\
I saw Miss Murdstone lay her beads down.\
\
\'91I declare,\'92 said my mother, gently, \'91they are exactly alike. I suppose\
they are mine. I think they are the colour of mine. But they are\
wonderfully alike.\'92\
\
\'91What are you talking about, Clara?\'92 said Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91My dear Jane,\'92 faltered my mother, a little abashed by the harsh tone\
of this inquiry, \'91I find that the baby\'92s eyes and Davy\'92s are exactly\
alike.\'92\
\
\'91Clara!\'92 said Miss Murdstone, rising angrily, \'91you are a positive fool\
sometimes.\'92\
\
\'91My dear Jane,\'92 remonstrated my mother.\
\
\'91A positive fool,\'92 said Miss Murdstone. \'91Who else could compare my\
brother\'92s baby with your boy? They are not at all alike. They are\
exactly unlike. They are utterly dissimilar in all respects. I hope\
they will ever remain so. I will not sit here, and hear such comparisons\
made.\'92 With that she stalked out, and made the door bang after her.\
\
In short, I was not a favourite with Miss Murdstone. In short, I was not\
a favourite there with anybody, not even with myself; for those who did\
like me could not show it, and those who did not, showed it so plainly\
that I had a sensitive consciousness of always appearing constrained,\
boorish, and dull.\
\
I felt that I made them as uncomfortable as they made me. If I came into\
the room where they were, and they were talking together and my mother\
seemed cheerful, an anxious cloud would steal over her face from the\
moment of my entrance. If Mr. Murdstone were in his best humour, I\
checked him. If Miss Murdstone were in her worst, I intensified it. I\
had perception enough to know that my mother was the victim always; that\
she was afraid to speak to me or to be kind to me, lest she should\
give them some offence by her manner of doing so, and receive a\
lecture afterwards; that she was not only ceaselessly afraid of her own\
offending, but of my offending, and uneasily watched their looks if I\
only moved. Therefore I resolved to keep myself as much out of their way\
as I could; and many a wintry hour did I hear the church clock strike,\
when I was sitting in my cheerless bedroom, wrapped in my little\
great-coat, poring over a book.\
\
In the evening, sometimes, I went and sat with Peggotty in the kitchen.\
There I was comfortable, and not afraid of being myself. But neither of\
these resources was approved of in the parlour. The tormenting humour\
which was dominant there stopped them both. I was still held to be\
necessary to my poor mother\'92s training, and, as one of her trials, could\
not be suffered to absent myself.\
\
\'91David,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, one day after dinner when I was going to\
leave the room as usual; \'91I am sorry to observe that you are of a sullen\
disposition.\'92\
\
\'91As sulky as a bear!\'92 said Miss Murdstone.\
\
I stood still, and hung my head.\
\
\'91Now, David,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, \'91a sullen obdurate disposition is, of\
all tempers, the worst.\'92\
\
\'91And the boy\'92s is, of all such dispositions that ever I have seen,\'92\
remarked his sister, \'91the most confirmed and stubborn. I think, my dear\
Clara, even you must observe it?\'92\
\
\'91I beg your pardon, my dear Jane,\'92 said my mother, \'91but are you quite\
sure--I am certain you\'92ll excuse me, my dear Jane--that you understand\
Davy?\'92\
\
\'91I should be somewhat ashamed of myself, Clara,\'92 returned Miss\
Murdstone, \'91if I could not understand the boy, or any boy. I don\'92t\
profess to be profound; but I do lay claim to common sense.\'92\
\
\'91No doubt, my dear Jane,\'92 returned my mother, \'91your understanding is\
very vigorous--\'92\
\
\'91Oh dear, no! Pray don\'92t say that, Clara,\'92 interposed Miss Murdstone,\
angrily.\
\
\'91But I am sure it is,\'92 resumed my mother; \'91and everybody knows it is. I\
profit so much by it myself, in many ways--at least I ought to--that no\
one can be more convinced of it than myself; and therefore I speak with\
great diffidence, my dear Jane, I assure you.\'92\
\
\'91We\'92ll say I don\'92t understand the boy, Clara,\'92 returned Miss Murdstone,\
arranging the little fetters on her wrists. \'91We\'92ll agree, if you please,\
that I don\'92t understand him at all. He is much too deep for me. But\
perhaps my brother\'92s penetration may enable him to have some insight\
into his character. And I believe my brother was speaking on the subject\
when we--not very decently--interrupted him.\'92\
\
\'91I think, Clara,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, in a low grave voice, \'91that there\
may be better and more dispassionate judges of such a question than\
you.\'92\
\
\'91Edward,\'92 replied my mother, timidly, \'91you are a far better judge of all\
questions than I pretend to be. Both you and Jane are. I only said--\'92\
\
\'91You only said something weak and inconsiderate,\'92 he replied. \'91Try not\
to do it again, my dear Clara, and keep a watch upon yourself.\'92\
\
My mother\'92s lips moved, as if she answered \'91Yes, my dear Edward,\'92 but\
she said nothing aloud.\
\
\'91I was sorry, David, I remarked,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, turning his head\
and his eyes stiffly towards me, \'91to observe that you are of a sullen\
disposition. This is not a character that I can suffer to develop itself\
beneath my eyes without an effort at improvement. You must endeavour,\
sir, to change it. We must endeavour to change it for you.\'92\
\
\'91I beg your pardon, sir,\'92 I faltered. \'91I have never meant to be sullen\
since I came back.\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t take refuge in a lie, sir!\'92 he returned so fiercely, that I saw\
my mother involuntarily put out her trembling hand as if to interpose\
between us. \'91You have withdrawn yourself in your sullenness to your own\
room. You have kept your own room when you ought to have been here. You\
know now, once for all, that I require you to be here, and not there.\
Further, that I require you to bring obedience here. You know me, David.\
I will have it done.\'92\
\
Miss Murdstone gave a hoarse chuckle.\
\
\'91I will have a respectful, prompt, and ready bearing towards myself,\'92 he\
continued, \'91and towards Jane Murdstone, and towards your mother. I will\
not have this room shunned as if it were infected, at the pleasure of a\
child. Sit down.\'92\
\
He ordered me like a dog, and I obeyed like a dog.\
\
\'91One thing more,\'92 he said. \'91I observe that you have an attachment to low\
and common company. You are not to associate with servants. The\
kitchen will not improve you, in the many respects in which you need\
improvement. Of the woman who abets you, I say nothing--since you,\
Clara,\'92 addressing my mother in a lower voice, \'91from old associations\
and long-established fancies, have a weakness respecting her which is\
not yet overcome.\'92\
\
\'91A most unaccountable delusion it is!\'92 cried Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91I only say,\'92 he resumed, addressing me, \'91that I disapprove of your\
preferring such company as Mistress Peggotty, and that it is to be\
abandoned. Now, David, you understand me, and you know what will be the\
consequence if you fail to obey me to the letter.\'92\
\
I knew well--better perhaps than he thought, as far as my poor mother\
was concerned--and I obeyed him to the letter. I retreated to my own\
room no more; I took refuge with Peggotty no more; but sat wearily in\
the parlour day after day, looking forward to night, and bedtime.\
\
What irksome constraint I underwent, sitting in the same attitude hours\
upon hours, afraid to move an arm or a leg lest Miss Murdstone should\
complain (as she did on the least pretence) of my restlessness, and\
afraid to move an eye lest she should light on some look of dislike\
or scrutiny that would find new cause for complaint in mine! What\
intolerable dulness to sit listening to the ticking of the clock; and\
watching Miss Murdstone\'92s little shiny steel beads as she strung them;\
and wondering whether she would ever be married, and if so, to what\
sort of unhappy man; and counting the divisions in the moulding of the\
chimney-piece; and wandering away, with my eyes, to the ceiling, among\
the curls and corkscrews in the paper on the wall!\
\
What walks I took alone, down muddy lanes, in the bad winter weather,\
carrying that parlour, and Mr. and Miss Murdstone in it, everywhere: a\
monstrous load that I was obliged to bear, a daymare that there was\
no possibility of breaking in, a weight that brooded on my wits, and\
blunted them!\
\
What meals I had in silence and embarrassment, always feeling that there\
were a knife and fork too many, and that mine; an appetite too many, and\
that mine; a plate and chair too many, and those mine; a somebody too\
many, and that I!\
\
What evenings, when the candles came, and I was expected to employ\
myself, but, not daring to read an entertaining book, pored over some\
hard-headed, harder-hearted treatise on arithmetic; when the tables of\
weights and measures set themselves to tunes, as \'91Rule Britannia\'92, or\
\'91Away with Melancholy\'92; when they wouldn\'92t stand still to be learnt, but\
would go threading my grandmother\'92s needle through my unfortunate head,\
in at one ear and out at the other! What yawns and dozes I lapsed into,\
in spite of all my care; what starts I came out of concealed sleeps\
with; what answers I never got, to little observations that I rarely\
made; what a blank space I seemed, which everybody overlooked, and\
yet was in everybody\'92s way; what a heavy relief it was to hear Miss\
Murdstone hail the first stroke of nine at night, and order me to bed!\
\
Thus the holidays lagged away, until the morning came when Miss\
Murdstone said: \'91Here\'92s the last day off!\'92 and gave me the closing cup\
of tea of the vacation.\
\
I was not sorry to go. I had lapsed into a stupid state; but I was\
recovering a little and looking forward to Steerforth, albeit Mr.\
Creakle loomed behind him. Again Mr. Barkis appeared at the gate, and\
again Miss Murdstone in her warning voice, said: \'91Clara!\'92 when my mother\
bent over me, to bid me farewell.\
\
I kissed her, and my baby brother, and was very sorry then; but not\
sorry to go away, for the gulf between us was there, and the parting was\
there, every day. And it is not so much the embrace she gave me, that\
lives in my mind, though it was as fervent as could be, as what followed\
the embrace.\
\
I was in the carrier\'92s cart when I heard her calling to me. I looked\
out, and she stood at the garden-gate alone, holding her baby up in her\
arms for me to see. It was cold still weather; and not a hair of her\
head, nor a fold of her dress, was stirred, as she looked intently at\
me, holding up her child.\
\
So I lost her. So I saw her afterwards, in my sleep at school--a silent\
presence near my bed--looking at me with the same intent face--holding\
up her baby in her arms.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 9. I HAVE A MEMORABLE BIRTHDAY\
\
\
I PASS over all that happened at school, until the anniversary of my\
birthday came round in March. Except that Steerforth was more to be\
admired than ever, I remember nothing. He was going away at the end of\
the half-year, if not sooner, and was more spirited and independent than\
before in my eyes, and therefore more engaging than before; but beyond\
this I remember nothing. The great remembrance by which that time is\
marked in my mind, seems to have swallowed up all lesser recollections,\
and to exist alone.\
\
It is even difficult for me to believe that there was a gap of full\
two months between my return to Salem House and the arrival of that\
birthday. I can only understand that the fact was so, because I know it\
must have been so; otherwise I should feel convinced that there was no\
interval, and that the one occasion trod upon the other\'92s heels.\
\
How well I recollect the kind of day it was! I smell the fog that hung\
about the place; I see the hoar frost, ghostly, through it; I feel my\
rimy hair fall clammy on my cheek; I look along the dim perspective of\
the schoolroom, with a sputtering candle here and there to light up the\
foggy morning, and the breath of the boys wreathing and smoking in the\
raw cold as they blow upon their fingers, and tap their feet upon the\
floor. It was after breakfast, and we had been summoned in from the\
playground, when Mr. Sharp entered and said:\
\
\'91David Copperfield is to go into the parlour.\'92\
\
I expected a hamper from Peggotty, and brightened at the order. Some\
of the boys about me put in their claim not to be forgotten in the\
distribution of the good things, as I got out of my seat with great\
alacrity.\
\
\'91Don\'92t hurry, David,\'92 said Mr. Sharp. \'91There\'92s time enough, my boy,\
don\'92t hurry.\'92\
\
I might have been surprised by the feeling tone in which he spoke, if I\
had given it a thought; but I gave it none until afterwards. I hurried\
away to the parlour; and there I found Mr. Creakle, sitting at his\
breakfast with the cane and a newspaper before him, and Mrs. Creakle\
with an opened letter in her hand. But no hamper.\
\
\'91David Copperfield,\'92 said Mrs. Creakle, leading me to a sofa, and\
sitting down beside me. \'91I want to speak to you very particularly. I\
have something to tell you, my child.\'92\
\
Mr. Creakle, at whom of course I looked, shook his head without looking\
at me, and stopped up a sigh with a very large piece of buttered toast.\
\
\'91You are too young to know how the world changes every day,\'92 said Mrs.\
Creakle, \'91and how the people in it pass away. But we all have to learn\
it, David; some of us when we are young, some of us when we are old,\
some of us at all times of our lives.\'92\
\
I looked at her earnestly.\
\
\'91When you came away from home at the end of the vacation,\'92 said Mrs.\
Creakle, after a pause, \'91were they all well?\'92 After another pause, \'91Was\
your mama well?\'92\
\
I trembled without distinctly knowing why, and still looked at her\
earnestly, making no attempt to answer.\
\
\'91Because,\'92 said she, \'91I grieve to tell you that I hear this morning your\
mama is very ill.\'92\
\
A mist rose between Mrs. Creakle and me, and her figure seemed to move\
in it for an instant. Then I felt the burning tears run down my face,\
and it was steady again.\
\
\'91She is very dangerously ill,\'92 she added.\
\
I knew all now.\
\
\'91She is dead.\'92\
\
There was no need to tell me so. I had already broken out into a\
desolate cry, and felt an orphan in the wide world.\
\
She was very kind to me. She kept me there all day, and left me alone\
sometimes; and I cried, and wore myself to sleep, and awoke and\
cried again. When I could cry no more, I began to think; and then the\
oppression on my breast was heaviest, and my grief a dull pain that\
there was no ease for.\
\
And yet my thoughts were idle; not intent on the calamity that weighed\
upon my heart, but idly loitering near it. I thought of our house shut\
up and hushed. I thought of the little baby, who, Mrs. Creakle said, had\
been pining away for some time, and who, they believed, would die too. I\
thought of my father\'92s grave in the churchyard, by our house, and of my\
mother lying there beneath the tree I knew so well. I stood upon a chair\
when I was left alone, and looked into the glass to see how red my eyes\
were, and how sorrowful my face. I considered, after some hours were\
gone, if my tears were really hard to flow now, as they seemed to be,\
what, in connexion with my loss, it would affect me most to think\
of when I drew near home--for I was going home to the funeral. I am\
sensible of having felt that a dignity attached to me among the rest of\
the boys, and that I was important in my affliction.\
\
If ever child were stricken with sincere grief, I was. But I remember\
that this importance was a kind of satisfaction to me, when I walked in\
the playground that afternoon while the boys were in school. When I\
saw them glancing at me out of the windows, as they went up to their\
classes, I felt distinguished, and looked more melancholy, and walked\
slower. When school was over, and they came out and spoke to me, I felt\
it rather good in myself not to be proud to any of them, and to take\
exactly the same notice of them all, as before.\
\
I was to go home next night; not by the mail, but by the heavy\
night-coach, which was called the Farmer, and was principally used by\
country-people travelling short intermediate distances upon the road. We\
had no story-telling that evening, and Traddles insisted on lending me\
his pillow. I don\'92t know what good he thought it would do me, for I\
had one of my own: but it was all he had to lend, poor fellow, except a\
sheet of letter-paper full of skeletons; and that he gave me at parting,\
as a soother of my sorrows and a contribution to my peace of mind.\
\
I left Salem House upon the morrow afternoon. I little thought then that\
I left it, never to return. We travelled very slowly all night, and\
did not get into Yarmouth before nine or ten o\'92clock in the morning. I\
looked out for Mr. Barkis, but he was not there; and instead of him a\
fat, short-winded, merry-looking, little old man in black, with rusty\
little bunches of ribbons at the knees of his breeches, black stockings,\
and a broad-brimmed hat, came puffing up to the coach window, and said:\
\
\'91Master Copperfield?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, sir.\'92\
\
\'91Will you come with me, young sir, if you please,\'92 he said, opening the\
door, \'91and I shall have the pleasure of taking you home.\'92\
\
I put my hand in his, wondering who he was, and we walked away to a\
shop in a narrow street, on which was written OMER, DRAPER, TAILOR,\
HABERDASHER, FUNERAL FURNISHER, &c. It was a close and stifling little\
shop; full of all sorts of clothing, made and unmade, including\
one window full of beaver-hats and bonnets. We went into a little\
back-parlour behind the shop, where we found three young women at work\
on a quantity of black materials, which were heaped upon the table,\
and little bits and cuttings of which were littered all over the floor.\
There was a good fire in the room, and a breathless smell of warm black\
crape--I did not know what the smell was then, but I know now.\
\
The three young women, who appeared to be very industrious and\
comfortable, raised their heads to look at me, and then went on with\
their work. Stitch, stitch, stitch. At the same time there came from\
a workshop across a little yard outside the window, a regular sound\
of hammering that kept a kind of tune: RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat,\
RAT--tat-tat, without any variation.\
\
\'91Well,\'92 said my conductor to one of the three young women. \'91How do you\
get on, Minnie?\'92\
\
\'91We shall be ready by the trying-on time,\'92 she replied gaily, without\
looking up. \'91Don\'92t you be afraid, father.\'92\
\
Mr. Omer took off his broad-brimmed hat, and sat down and panted. He was\
so fat that he was obliged to pant some time before he could say:\
\
\'91That\'92s right.\'92\
\
\'91Father!\'92 said Minnie, playfully. \'91What a porpoise you do grow!\'92\
\
\'91Well, I don\'92t know how it is, my dear,\'92 he replied, considering about\
it. \'91I am rather so.\'92\
\
\'91You are such a comfortable man, you see,\'92 said Minnie. \'91You take things\
so easy.\'92\
\
\'91No use taking \'91em otherwise, my dear,\'92 said Mr. Omer.\
\
\'91No, indeed,\'92 returned his daughter. \'91We are all pretty gay here, thank\
Heaven! Ain\'92t we, father?\'92\
\
\'91I hope so, my dear,\'92 said Mr. Omer. \'91As I have got my breath now, I\
think I\'92ll measure this young scholar. Would you walk into the shop,\
Master Copperfield?\'92\
\
I preceded Mr. Omer, in compliance with his request; and after showing\
me a roll of cloth which he said was extra super, and too good mourning\
for anything short of parents, he took my various dimensions, and put\
them down in a book. While he was recording them he called my attention\
to his stock in trade, and to certain fashions which he said had \'91just\
come up\'92, and to certain other fashions which he said had \'91just gone\
out\'92.\
\
\'91And by that sort of thing we very often lose a little mint of money,\'92\
said Mr. Omer. \'91But fashions are like human beings. They come in, nobody\
knows when, why, or how; and they go out, nobody knows when, why, or\
how. Everything is like life, in my opinion, if you look at it in that\
point of view.\'92\
\
I was too sorrowful to discuss the question, which would possibly have\
been beyond me under any circumstances; and Mr. Omer took me back into\
the parlour, breathing with some difficulty on the way.\
\
He then called down a little break-neck range of steps behind a door:\
\'91Bring up that tea and bread-and-butter!\'92 which, after some time,\
during which I sat looking about me and thinking, and listening to the\
stitching in the room and the tune that was being hammered across the\
yard, appeared on a tray, and turned out to be for me.\
\
\'91I have been acquainted with you,\'92 said Mr. Omer, after watching me\
for some minutes, during which I had not made much impression on the\
breakfast, for the black things destroyed my appetite, \'91I have been\
acquainted with you a long time, my young friend.\'92\
\
\'91Have you, sir?\'92\
\
\'91All your life,\'92 said Mr. Omer. \'91I may say before it. I knew your\
father before you. He was five foot nine and a half, and he lays in\
five-and-twen-ty foot of ground.\'92\
\
\'91RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat,\'92 across the yard.\
\
\'91He lays in five and twen-ty foot of ground, if he lays in a fraction,\'92\
said Mr. Omer, pleasantly. \'91It was either his request or her direction,\
I forget which.\'92\
\
\'91Do you know how my little brother is, sir?\'92 I inquired.\
\
Mr. Omer shook his head.\
\
\'91RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat, RAT--tat-tat.\'92\
\
\'91He is in his mother\'92s arms,\'92 said he.\
\
\'91Oh, poor little fellow! Is he dead?\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t mind it more than you can help,\'92 said Mr. Omer. \'91Yes. The baby\'92s\
dead.\'92\
\
My wounds broke out afresh at this intelligence. I left the\
scarcely-tasted breakfast, and went and rested my head on another table,\
in a corner of the little room, which Minnie hastily cleared, lest I\
should spot the mourning that was lying there with my tears. She was\
a pretty, good-natured girl, and put my hair away from my eyes with a\
soft, kind touch; but she was very cheerful at having nearly finished\
her work and being in good time, and was so different from me!\
\
Presently the tune left off, and a good-looking young fellow came across\
the yard into the room. He had a hammer in his hand, and his mouth was\
full of little nails, which he was obliged to take out before he could\
speak.\
\
\'91Well, Joram!\'92 said Mr. Omer. \'91How do you get on?\'92\
\
\'91All right,\'92 said Joram. \'91Done, sir.\'92\
\
Minnie coloured a little, and the other two girls smiled at one another.\
\
\'91What! you were at it by candle-light last night, when I was at the\
club, then? Were you?\'92 said Mr. Omer, shutting up one eye.\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Joram. \'91As you said we could make a little trip of it, and\
go over together, if it was done, Minnie and me--and you.\'92\
\
\'91Oh! I thought you were going to leave me out altogether,\'92 said Mr.\
Omer, laughing till he coughed.\
\
\'91--As you was so good as to say that,\'92 resumed the young man, \'91why I\
turned to with a will, you see. Will you give me your opinion of it?\'92\
\
\'91I will,\'92 said Mr. Omer, rising. \'91My dear\'92; and he stopped and turned to\
me: \'91would you like to see your--\'92\
\
\'91No, father,\'92 Minnie interposed.\
\
\'91I thought it might be agreeable, my dear,\'92 said Mr. Omer. \'91But perhaps\
you\'92re right.\'92\
\
I can\'92t say how I knew it was my dear, dear mother\'92s coffin that they\
went to look at. I had never heard one making; I had never seen one that\
I know of.--but it came into my mind what the noise was, while it was\
going on; and when the young man entered, I am sure I knew what he had\
been doing.\
\
The work being now finished, the two girls, whose names I had not heard,\
brushed the shreds and threads from their dresses, and went into the\
shop to put that to rights, and wait for customers. Minnie stayed behind\
to fold up what they had made, and pack it in two baskets. This she did\
upon her knees, humming a lively little tune the while. Joram, who I had\
no doubt was her lover, came in and stole a kiss from her while she was\
busy (he didn\'92t appear to mind me, at all), and said her father was gone\
for the chaise, and he must make haste and get himself ready. Then he\
went out again; and then she put her thimble and scissors in her pocket,\
and stuck a needle threaded with black thread neatly in the bosom of her\
gown, and put on her outer clothing smartly, at a little glass behind\
the door, in which I saw the reflection of her pleased face.\
\
All this I observed, sitting at the table in the corner with my head\
leaning on my hand, and my thoughts running on very different things.\
The chaise soon came round to the front of the shop, and the baskets\
being put in first, I was put in next, and those three followed. I\
remember it as a kind of half chaise-cart, half pianoforte-van, painted\
of a sombre colour, and drawn by a black horse with a long tail. There\
was plenty of room for us all.\
\
I do not think I have ever experienced so strange a feeling in my life\
(I am wiser now, perhaps) as that of being with them, remembering how\
they had been employed, and seeing them enjoy the ride. I was not angry\
with them; I was more afraid of them, as if I were cast away among\
creatures with whom I had no community of nature. They were very\
cheerful. The old man sat in front to drive, and the two young people\
sat behind him, and whenever he spoke to them leaned forward, the one on\
one side of his chubby face and the other on the other, and made a great\
deal of him. They would have talked to me too, but I held back, and\
moped in my corner; scared by their love-making and hilarity, though\
it was far from boisterous, and almost wondering that no judgement came\
upon them for their hardness of heart.\
\
So, when they stopped to bait the horse, and ate and drank and enjoyed\
themselves, I could touch nothing that they touched, but kept my fast\
unbroken. So, when we reached home, I dropped out of the chaise behind,\
as quickly as possible, that I might not be in their company before\
those solemn windows, looking blindly on me like closed eyes once\
bright. And oh, how little need I had had to think what would move me to\
tears when I came back--seeing the window of my mother\'92s room, and next\
it that which, in the better time, was mine!\
\
I was in Peggotty\'92s arms before I got to the door, and she took me into\
the house. Her grief burst out when she first saw me; but she controlled\
it soon, and spoke in whispers, and walked softly, as if the dead could\
be disturbed. She had not been in bed, I found, for a long time. She\
sat up at night still, and watched. As long as her poor dear pretty was\
above the ground, she said, she would never desert her.\
\
Mr. Murdstone took no heed of me when I went into the parlour where he\
was, but sat by the fireside, weeping silently, and pondering in his\
elbow-chair. Miss Murdstone, who was busy at her writing-desk, which\
was covered with letters and papers, gave me her cold finger-nails, and\
asked me, in an iron whisper, if I had been measured for my mourning.\
\
I said: \'91Yes.\'92\
\
\'91And your shirts,\'92 said Miss Murdstone; \'91have you brought \'91em home?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, ma\'92am. I have brought home all my clothes.\'92\
\
This was all the consolation that her firmness administered to me. I do\
not doubt that she had a choice pleasure in exhibiting what she called\
her self-command, and her firmness, and her strength of mind, and\
her common sense, and the whole diabolical catalogue of her unamiable\
qualities, on such an occasion. She was particularly proud of her turn\
for business; and she showed it now in reducing everything to pen and\
ink, and being moved by nothing. All the rest of that day, and from\
morning to night afterwards, she sat at that desk, scratching composedly\
with a hard pen, speaking in the same imperturbable whisper to\
everybody; never relaxing a muscle of her face, or softening a tone of\
her voice, or appearing with an atom of her dress astray.\
\
Her brother took a book sometimes, but never read it that I saw. He\
would open it and look at it as if he were reading, but would remain for\
a whole hour without turning the leaf, and then put it down and walk to\
and fro in the room. I used to sit with folded hands watching him, and\
counting his footsteps, hour after hour. He very seldom spoke to her,\
and never to me. He seemed to be the only restless thing, except the\
clocks, in the whole motionless house.\
\
In these days before the funeral, I saw but little of Peggotty, except\
that, in passing up or down stairs, I always found her close to the room\
where my mother and her baby lay, and except that she came to me every\
night, and sat by my bed\'92s head while I went to sleep. A day or\
two before the burial--I think it was a day or two before, but I am\
conscious of confusion in my mind about that heavy time, with nothing\
to mark its progress--she took me into the room. I only recollect that\
underneath some white covering on the bed, with a beautiful cleanliness\
and freshness all around it, there seemed to me to lie embodied the\
solemn stillness that was in the house; and that when she would have\
turned the cover gently back, I cried: \'91Oh no! oh no!\'92 and held her\
hand.\
\
If the funeral had been yesterday, I could not recollect it better. The\
very air of the best parlour, when I went in at the door, the bright\
condition of the fire, the shining of the wine in the decanters, the\
patterns of the glasses and plates, the faint sweet smell of cake, the\
odour of Miss Murdstone\'92s dress, and our black clothes. Mr. Chillip is\
in the room, and comes to speak to me.\
\
\'91And how is Master David?\'92 he says, kindly.\
\
I cannot tell him very well. I give him my hand, which he holds in his.\
\
\'91Dear me!\'92 says Mr. Chillip, meekly smiling, with something shining in\
his eye. \'91Our little friends grow up around us. They grow out of our\
knowledge, ma\'92am?\'92 This is to Miss Murdstone, who makes no reply.\
\
\'91There is a great improvement here, ma\'92am?\'92 says Mr. Chillip.\
\
Miss Murdstone merely answers with a frown and a formal bend: Mr.\
Chillip, discomfited, goes into a corner, keeping me with him, and opens\
his mouth no more.\
\
I remark this, because I remark everything that happens, not because\
I care about myself, or have done since I came home. And now the bell\
begins to sound, and Mr. Omer and another come to make us ready. As\
Peggotty was wont to tell me, long ago, the followers of my father to\
the same grave were made ready in the same room.\
\
There are Mr. Murdstone, our neighbour Mr. Grayper, Mr. Chillip, and\
I. When we go out to the door, the Bearers and their load are in the\
garden; and they move before us down the path, and past the elms, and\
through the gate, and into the churchyard, where I have so often heard\
the birds sing on a summer morning.\
\
We stand around the grave. The day seems different to me from every\
other day, and the light not of the same colour--of a sadder colour.\
Now there is a solemn hush, which we have brought from home with what is\
resting in the mould; and while we stand bareheaded, I hear the voice\
of the clergyman, sounding remote in the open air, and yet distinct and\
plain, saying: \'91I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord!\'92\
Then I hear sobs; and, standing apart among the lookers-on, I see that\
good and faithful servant, whom of all the people upon earth I love the\
best, and unto whom my childish heart is certain that the Lord will one\
day say: \'91Well done.\'92\
\
There are many faces that I know, among the little crowd; faces that I\
knew in church, when mine was always wondering there; faces that first\
saw my mother, when she came to the village in her youthful bloom. I do\
not mind them--I mind nothing but my grief--and yet I see and know them\
all; and even in the background, far away, see Minnie looking on, and\
her eye glancing on her sweetheart, who is near me.\
\
It is over, and the earth is filled in, and we turn to come away. Before\
us stands our house, so pretty and unchanged, so linked in my mind with\
the young idea of what is gone, that all my sorrow has been nothing to\
the sorrow it calls forth. But they take me on; and Mr. Chillip talks to\
me; and when we get home, puts some water to my lips; and when I ask his\
leave to go up to my room, dismisses me with the gentleness of a woman.\
\
All this, I say, is yesterday\'92s event. Events of later date have floated\
from me to the shore where all forgotten things will reappear, but this\
stands like a high rock in the ocean.\
\
I knew that Peggotty would come to me in my room. The Sabbath stillness\
of the time (the day was so like Sunday! I have forgotten that) was\
suited to us both. She sat down by my side upon my little bed; and\
holding my hand, and sometimes putting it to her lips, and sometimes\
smoothing it with hers, as she might have comforted my little brother,\
told me, in her way, all that she had to tell concerning what had\
happened.\
\
\'91She was never well,\'92 said Peggotty, \'91for a long time. She was uncertain\
in her mind, and not happy. When her baby was born, I thought at first\
she would get better, but she was more delicate, and sunk a little every\
day. She used to like to sit alone before her baby came, and then she\
cried; but afterwards she used to sing to it--so soft, that I once\
thought, when I heard her, it was like a voice up in the air, that was\
rising away.\
\
\'91I think she got to be more timid, and more frightened-like, of late;\
and that a hard word was like a blow to her. But she was always the same\
to me. She never changed to her foolish Peggotty, didn\'92t my sweet girl.\'92\
\
Here Peggotty stopped, and softly beat upon my hand a little while.\
\
\'91The last time that I saw her like her own old self, was the night when\
you came home, my dear. The day you went away, she said to me, \'93I never\
shall see my pretty darling again. Something tells me so, that tells the\
truth, I know.\'94\
\
\'91She tried to hold up after that; and many a time, when they told her\
she was thoughtless and light-hearted, made believe to be so; but it was\
all a bygone then. She never told her husband what she had told me--she\
was afraid of saying it to anybody else--till one night, a little more\
than a week before it happened, when she said to him: \'93My dear, I think\
I am dying.\'94\
\
\'91\'93It\'92s off my mind now, Peggotty,\'94 she told me, when I laid her in her\
bed that night. \'93He will believe it more and more, poor fellow, every\
day for a few days to come; and then it will be past. I am very tired.\
If this is sleep, sit by me while I sleep: don\'92t leave me. God bless\
both my children! God protect and keep my fatherless boy!\'94\
\
\'91I never left her afterwards,\'92 said Peggotty. \'91She often talked to them\
two downstairs--for she loved them; she couldn\'92t bear not to love anyone\
who was about her--but when they went away from her bed-side, she always\
turned to me, as if there was rest where Peggotty was, and never fell\
asleep in any other way.\
\
\'91On the last night, in the evening, she kissed me, and said: \'93If my baby\
should die too, Peggotty, please let them lay him in my arms, and bury\
us together.\'94 (It was done; for the poor lamb lived but a day beyond\
her.) \'93Let my dearest boy go with us to our resting-place,\'94 she said,\
\'93and tell him that his mother, when she lay here, blessed him not once,\
but a thousand times.\'94\'92\
\
Another silence followed this, and another gentle beating on my hand.\
\
\'91It was pretty far in the night,\'92 said Peggotty, \'91when she asked me for\
some drink; and when she had taken it, gave me such a patient smile, the\
dear!--so beautiful!\
\
\'91Daybreak had come, and the sun was rising, when she said to me, how\
kind and considerate Mr. Copperfield had always been to her, and how\
he had borne with her, and told her, when she doubted herself, that\
a loving heart was better and stronger than wisdom, and that he was a\
happy man in hers. \'93Peggotty, my dear,\'94 she said then, \'93put me nearer to\
you,\'94 for she was very weak. \'93Lay your good arm underneath my neck,\'94 she\
said, \'93and turn me to you, for your face is going far off, and I want it\
to be near.\'94 I put it as she asked; and oh Davy! the time had come when\
my first parting words to you were true--when she was glad to lay her\
poor head on her stupid cross old Peggotty\'92s arm--and she died like a\
child that had gone to sleep!\'92\
\
\
Thus ended Peggotty\'92s narration. From the moment of my knowing of the\
death of my mother, the idea of her as she had been of late had vanished\
from me. I remembered her, from that instant, only as the young mother\
of my earliest impressions, who had been used to wind her bright curls\
round and round her finger, and to dance with me at twilight in the\
parlour. What Peggotty had told me now, was so far from bringing me back\
to the later period, that it rooted the earlier image in my mind. It may\
be curious, but it is true. In her death she winged her way back to her\
calm untroubled youth, and cancelled all the rest.\
\
The mother who lay in the grave, was the mother of my infancy; the\
little creature in her arms, was myself, as I had once been, hushed for\
ever on her bosom.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 10. I BECOME NEGLECTED, AND AM PROVIDED FOR\
\
\
The first act of business Miss Murdstone performed when the day of the\
solemnity was over, and light was freely admitted into the house, was\
to give Peggotty a month\'92s warning. Much as Peggotty would have disliked\
such a service, I believe she would have retained it, for my sake, in\
preference to the best upon earth. She told me we must part, and told me\
why; and we condoled with one another, in all sincerity.\
\
As to me or my future, not a word was said, or a step taken. Happy\
they would have been, I dare say, if they could have dismissed me at a\
month\'92s warning too. I mustered courage once, to ask Miss Murdstone when\
I was going back to school; and she answered dryly, she believed I was\
not going back at all. I was told nothing more. I was very anxious to\
know what was going to be done with me, and so was Peggotty; but neither\
she nor I could pick up any information on the subject.\
\
There was one change in my condition, which, while it relieved me of\
a great deal of present uneasiness, might have made me, if I had been\
capable of considering it closely, yet more uncomfortable about the\
future. It was this. The constraint that had been put upon me, was quite\
abandoned. I was so far from being required to keep my dull post in\
the parlour, that on several occasions, when I took my seat there, Miss\
Murdstone frowned to me to go away. I was so far from being warned off\
from Peggotty\'92s society, that, provided I was not in Mr. Murdstone\'92s, I\
was never sought out or inquired for. At first I was in daily dread of\
his taking my education in hand again, or of Miss Murdstone\'92s\
devoting herself to it; but I soon began to think that such fears were\
groundless, and that all I had to anticipate was neglect.\
\
I do not conceive that this discovery gave me much pain then. I was\
still giddy with the shock of my mother\'92s death, and in a kind of\
stunned state as to all tributary things. I can recollect, indeed, to\
have speculated, at odd times, on the possibility of my not being taught\
any more, or cared for any more; and growing up to be a shabby, moody\
man, lounging an idle life away, about the village; as well as on the\
feasibility of my getting rid of this picture by going away somewhere,\
like the hero in a story, to seek my fortune: but these were transient\
visions, daydreams I sat looking at sometimes, as if they were faintly\
painted or written on the wall of my room, and which, as they melted\
away, left the wall blank again.\
\
\'91Peggotty,\'92 I said in a thoughtful whisper, one evening, when I was\
warming my hands at the kitchen fire, \'91Mr. Murdstone likes me less than\
he used to. He never liked me much, Peggotty; but he would rather not\
even see me now, if he can help it.\'92\
\
\'91Perhaps it\'92s his sorrow,\'92 said Peggotty, stroking my hair.\
\
\'91I am sure, Peggotty, I am sorry too. If I believed it was his sorrow,\
I should not think of it at all. But it\'92s not that; oh, no, it\'92s not\
that.\'92\
\
\'91How do you know it\'92s not that?\'92 said Peggotty, after a silence.\
\
\'91Oh, his sorrow is another and quite a different thing. He is sorry at\
this moment, sitting by the fireside with Miss Murdstone; but if I was\
to go in, Peggotty, he would be something besides.\'92\
\
\'91What would he be?\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91Angry,\'92 I answered, with an involuntary imitation of his dark frown.\
\'91If he was only sorry, he wouldn\'92t look at me as he does. I am only\
sorry, and it makes me feel kinder.\'92\
\
Peggotty said nothing for a little while; and I warmed my hands, as\
silent as she.\
\
\'91Davy,\'92 she said at length.\
\
\'91Yes, Peggotty?\'92 \'91I have tried, my dear, all ways I could think of--all\
the ways there are, and all the ways there ain\'92t, in short--to get a\
suitable service here, in Blunderstone; but there\'92s no such a thing, my\
love.\'92\
\
\'91And what do you mean to do, Peggotty,\'92 says I, wistfully. \'91Do you mean\
to go and seek your fortune?\'92\
\
\'91I expect I shall be forced to go to Yarmouth,\'92 replied Peggotty, \'91and\
live there.\'92\
\
\'91You might have gone farther off,\'92 I said, brightening a little, \'91and\
been as bad as lost. I shall see you sometimes, my dear old Peggotty,\
there. You won\'92t be quite at the other end of the world, will you?\'92\
\
\'91Contrary ways, please God!\'92 cried Peggotty, with great animation. \'91As\
long as you are here, my pet, I shall come over every week of my life to\
see you. One day, every week of my life!\'92\
\
I felt a great weight taken off my mind by this promise: but even this\
was not all, for Peggotty went on to say:\
\
\'91I\'92m a-going, Davy, you see, to my brother\'92s, first, for another\
fortnight\'92s visit--just till I have had time to look about me, and\
get to be something like myself again. Now, I have been thinking that\
perhaps, as they don\'92t want you here at present, you might be let to go\
along with me.\'92\
\
If anything, short of being in a different relation to every one about\
me, Peggotty excepted, could have given me a sense of pleasure at that\
time, it would have been this project of all others. The idea of being\
again surrounded by those honest faces, shining welcome on me; of\
renewing the peacefulness of the sweet Sunday morning, when the bells\
were ringing, the stones dropping in the water, and the shadowy ships\
breaking through the mist; of roaming up and down with little Em\'92ly,\
telling her my troubles, and finding charms against them in the shells\
and pebbles on the beach; made a calm in my heart. It was ruffled next\
moment, to be sure, by a doubt of Miss Murdstone\'92s giving her consent;\
but even that was set at rest soon, for she came out to take an evening\
grope in the store-closet while we were yet in conversation, and\
Peggotty, with a boldness that amazed me, broached the topic on the\
spot.\
\
\'91The boy will be idle there,\'92 said Miss Murdstone, looking into a\
pickle-jar, \'91and idleness is the root of all evil. But, to be sure, he\
would be idle here--or anywhere, in my opinion.\'92\
\
Peggotty had an angry answer ready, I could see; but she swallowed it\
for my sake, and remained silent.\
\
\'91Humph!\'92 said Miss Murdstone, still keeping her eye on the pickles;\
\'91it is of more importance than anything else--it is of paramount\
importance--that my brother should not be disturbed or made\
uncomfortable. I suppose I had better say yes.\'92\
\
I thanked her, without making any demonstration of joy, lest it should\
induce her to withdraw her assent. Nor could I help thinking this a\
prudent course, since she looked at me out of the pickle-jar, with\
as great an access of sourness as if her black eyes had absorbed its\
contents. However, the permission was given, and was never retracted;\
for when the month was out, Peggotty and I were ready to depart.\
\
Mr. Barkis came into the house for Peggotty\'92s boxes. I had never known\
him to pass the garden-gate before, but on this occasion he came into\
the house. And he gave me a look as he shouldered the largest box and\
went out, which I thought had meaning in it, if meaning could ever be\
said to find its way into Mr. Barkis\'92s visage.\
\
Peggotty was naturally in low spirits at leaving what had been her home\
so many years, and where the two strong attachments of her life--for\
my mother and myself--had been formed. She had been walking in the\
churchyard, too, very early; and she got into the cart, and sat in it\
with her handkerchief at her eyes.\
\
So long as she remained in this condition, Mr. Barkis gave no sign\
of life whatever. He sat in his usual place and attitude like a great\
stuffed figure. But when she began to look about her, and to speak to\
me, he nodded his head and grinned several times. I have not the least\
notion at whom, or what he meant by it.\
\
\'91It\'92s a beautiful day, Mr. Barkis!\'92 I said, as an act of politeness.\
\
\'91It ain\'92t bad,\'92 said Mr. Barkis, who generally qualified his speech, and\
rarely committed himself.\
\
\'91Peggotty is quite comfortable now, Mr. Barkis,\'92 I remarked, for his\
satisfaction.\
\
\'91Is she, though?\'92 said Mr. Barkis.\
\
After reflecting about it, with a sagacious air, Mr. Barkis eyed her,\
and said:\
\
\'91ARE you pretty comfortable?\'92\
\
Peggotty laughed, and answered in the affirmative.\
\
\'91But really and truly, you know. Are you?\'92 growled Mr. Barkis, sliding\
nearer to her on the seat, and nudging her with his elbow. \'91Are you?\
Really and truly pretty comfortable? Are you? Eh?\'92\
\
At each of these inquiries Mr. Barkis shuffled nearer to her, and gave\
her another nudge; so that at last we were all crowded together in the\
left-hand corner of the cart, and I was so squeezed that I could hardly\
bear it.\
\
Peggotty calling his attention to my sufferings, Mr. Barkis gave me a\
little more room at once, and got away by degrees. But I could not help\
observing that he seemed to think he had hit upon a wonderful expedient\
for expressing himself in a neat, agreeable, and pointed manner, without\
the inconvenience of inventing conversation. He manifestly chuckled over\
it for some time. By and by he turned to Peggotty again, and repeating,\
\'91Are you pretty comfortable though?\'92 bore down upon us as before, until\
the breath was nearly edged out of my body. By and by he made another\
descent upon us with the same inquiry, and the same result. At length,\
I got up whenever I saw him coming, and standing on the foot-board,\
pretended to look at the prospect; after which I did very well.\
\
He was so polite as to stop at a public-house, expressly on our account,\
and entertain us with broiled mutton and beer. Even when Peggotty was\
in the act of drinking, he was seized with one of those approaches, and\
almost choked her. But as we drew nearer to the end of our journey, he\
had more to do and less time for gallantry; and when we got on Yarmouth\
pavement, we were all too much shaken and jolted, I apprehend, to have\
any leisure for anything else.\
\
Mr. Peggotty and Ham waited for us at the old place. They received me\
and Peggotty in an affectionate manner, and shook hands with Mr. Barkis,\
who, with his hat on the very back of his head, and a shame-faced leer\
upon his countenance, and pervading his very legs, presented but a\
vacant appearance, I thought. They each took one of Peggotty\'92s trunks,\
and we were going away, when Mr. Barkis solemnly made a sign to me with\
his forefinger to come under an archway.\
\
\'91I say,\'92 growled Mr. Barkis, \'91it was all right.\'92\
\
I looked up into his face, and answered, with an attempt to be very\
profound: \'91Oh!\'92\
\
\'91It didn\'92t come to a end there,\'92 said Mr. Barkis, nodding\
confidentially. \'91It was all right.\'92\
\
Again I answered, \'91Oh!\'92\
\
\'91You know who was willin\'92,\'92 said my friend. \'91It was Barkis, and Barkis\
only.\'92\
\
I nodded assent.\
\
\'91It\'92s all right,\'92 said Mr. Barkis, shaking hands; \'91I\'92m a friend of\
your\'92n. You made it all right, first. It\'92s all right.\'92\
\
In his attempts to be particularly lucid, Mr. Barkis was so extremely\
mysterious, that I might have stood looking in his face for an hour, and\
most assuredly should have got as much information out of it as out\
of the face of a clock that had stopped, but for Peggotty\'92s calling me\
away. As we were going along, she asked me what he had said; and I told\
her he had said it was all right.\
\
\'91Like his impudence,\'92 said Peggotty, \'91but I don\'92t mind that! Davy dear,\
what should you think if I was to think of being married?\'92\
\
\'91Why--I suppose you would like me as much then, Peggotty, as you do\
now?\'92 I returned, after a little consideration.\
\
Greatly to the astonishment of the passengers in the street, as well as\
of her relations going on before, the good soul was obliged to stop and\
embrace me on the spot, with many protestations of her unalterable love.\
\
\'91Tell me what should you say, darling?\'92 she asked again, when this was\
over, and we were walking on.\
\
\'91If you were thinking of being married--to Mr. Barkis, Peggotty?\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Peggotty.\
\
\'91I should think it would be a very good thing. For then you know,\
Peggotty, you would always have the horse and cart to bring you over to\
see me, and could come for nothing, and be sure of coming.\'92\
\
\'91The sense of the dear!\'92 cried Peggotty. \'91What I have been thinking\
of, this month back! Yes, my precious; and I think I should be more\
independent altogether, you see; let alone my working with a better\
heart in my own house, than I could in anybody else\'92s now. I don\'92t know\
what I might be fit for, now, as a servant to a stranger. And I shall be\
always near my pretty\'92s resting-place,\'92 said Peggotty, musing, \'91and be\
able to see it when I like; and when I lie down to rest, I may be laid\
not far off from my darling girl!\'92\
\
We neither of us said anything for a little while.\
\
\'91But I wouldn\'92t so much as give it another thought,\'92 said Peggotty,\
cheerily \'91if my Davy was anyways against it--not if I had been asked in\
church thirty times three times over, and was wearing out the ring in my\
pocket.\'92\
\
\'91Look at me, Peggotty,\'92 I replied; \'91and see if I am not really glad, and\
don\'92t truly wish it!\'92 As indeed I did, with all my heart.\
\
\'91Well, my life,\'92 said Peggotty, giving me a squeeze, \'91I have thought of\
it night and day, every way I can, and I hope the right way; but I\'92ll\
think of it again, and speak to my brother about it, and in the meantime\
we\'92ll keep it to ourselves, Davy, you and me. Barkis is a good plain\
creature,\'92 said Peggotty, \'91and if I tried to do my duty by him, I think\
it would be my fault if I wasn\'92t--if I wasn\'92t pretty comfortable,\'92\
said Peggotty, laughing heartily. This quotation from Mr. Barkis was\
so appropriate, and tickled us both so much, that we laughed again and\
again, and were quite in a pleasant humour when we came within view of\
Mr. Peggotty\'92s cottage.\
\
It looked just the same, except that it may, perhaps, have shrunk a\
little in my eyes; and Mrs. Gummidge was waiting at the door as if she\
had stood there ever since. All within was the same, down to the seaweed\
in the blue mug in my bedroom. I went into the out-house to look about\
me; and the very same lobsters, crabs, and crawfish possessed by the\
same desire to pinch the world in general, appeared to be in the same\
state of conglomeration in the same old corner.\
\
But there was no little Em\'92ly to be seen, so I asked Mr. Peggotty where\
she was.\
\
\'91She\'92s at school, sir,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, wiping the heat consequent\
on the porterage of Peggotty\'92s box from his forehead; \'91she\'92ll be home,\'92\
looking at the Dutch clock, \'91in from twenty minutes to half-an-hour\'92s\
time. We all on us feel the loss of her, bless ye!\'92\
\
Mrs. Gummidge moaned.\
\
\'91Cheer up, Mawther!\'92 cried Mr. Peggotty.\
\
\'91I feel it more than anybody else,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge; \'91I\'92m a lone\
lorn creetur\'92, and she used to be a\'92most the only thing that didn\'92t go\
contrary with me.\'92\
\
Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shaking her head, applied herself to\
blowing the fire. Mr. Peggotty, looking round upon us while she was so\
engaged, said in a low voice, which he shaded with his hand: \'91The old\
\'91un!\'92 From this I rightly conjectured that no improvement had taken\
place since my last visit in the state of Mrs. Gummidge\'92s spirits.\
\
Now, the whole place was, or it should have been, quite as delightful\
a place as ever; and yet it did not impress me in the same way. I felt\
rather disappointed with it. Perhaps it was because little Em\'92ly was\
not at home. I knew the way by which she would come, and presently found\
myself strolling along the path to meet her.\
\
A figure appeared in the distance before long, and I soon knew it to be\
Em\'92ly, who was a little creature still in stature, though she was grown.\
But when she drew nearer, and I saw her blue eyes looking bluer, and her\
dimpled face looking brighter, and her whole self prettier and gayer, a\
curious feeling came over me that made me pretend not to know her, and\
pass by as if I were looking at something a long way off. I have done\
such a thing since in later life, or I am mistaken.\
\
Little Em\'92ly didn\'92t care a bit. She saw me well enough; but instead of\
turning round and calling after me, ran away laughing. This obliged me\
to run after her, and she ran so fast that we were very near the cottage\
before I caught her.\
\
\'91Oh, it\'92s you, is it?\'92 said little Em\'92ly.\
\
\'91Why, you knew who it was, Em\'92ly,\'92 said I.\
\
\'91And didn\'92t YOU know who it was?\'92 said Em\'92ly. I was going to kiss her,\
but she covered her cherry lips with her hands, and said she wasn\'92t a\
baby now, and ran away, laughing more than ever, into the house.\
\
She seemed to delight in teasing me, which was a change in her I\
wondered at very much. The tea table was ready, and our little locker\
was put out in its old place, but instead of coming to sit by me, she\
went and bestowed her company upon that grumbling Mrs. Gummidge: and on\
Mr. Peggotty\'92s inquiring why, rumpled her hair all over her face to hide\
it, and could do nothing but laugh.\
\
\'91A little puss, it is!\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, patting her with his great\
hand.\
\
\'91So sh\'92 is! so sh\'92 is!\'92 cried Ham. \'91Mas\'92r Davy bor\'92, so sh\'92 is!\'92 and he\
sat and chuckled at her for some time, in a state of mingled admiration\
and delight, that made his face a burning red.\
\
Little Em\'92ly was spoiled by them all, in fact; and by no one more than\
Mr. Peggotty himself, whom she could have coaxed into anything, by\
only going and laying her cheek against his rough whisker. That was my\
opinion, at least, when I saw her do it; and I held Mr. Peggotty to be\
thoroughly in the right. But she was so affectionate and sweet-natured,\
and had such a pleasant manner of being both sly and shy at once, that\
she captivated me more than ever.\
\
She was tender-hearted, too; for when, as we sat round the fire after\
tea, an allusion was made by Mr. Peggotty over his pipe to the loss\
I had sustained, the tears stood in her eyes, and she looked at me so\
kindly across the table, that I felt quite thankful to her.\
\
\'91Ah!\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, taking up her curls, and running them over his\
hand like water, \'91here\'92s another orphan, you see, sir. And here,\'92 said\
Mr. Peggotty, giving Ham a backhanded knock in the chest, \'91is another of\
\'91em, though he don\'92t look much like it.\'92\
\
\'91If I had you for my guardian, Mr. Peggotty,\'92 said I, shaking my head,\
\'91I don\'92t think I should FEEL much like it.\'92\
\
\'91Well said, Mas\'92r Davy bor\'92!\'92 cried Ham, in an ecstasy. \'91Hoorah! Well\
said! Nor more you wouldn\'92t! Hor! Hor!\'92--Here he returned Mr. Peggotty\'92s\
back-hander, and little Em\'92ly got up and kissed Mr. Peggotty. \'91And how\'92s\
your friend, sir?\'92 said Mr. Peggotty to me.\
\
\'91Steerforth?\'92 said I.\
\
\'91That\'92s the name!\'92 cried Mr. Peggotty, turning to Ham. \'91I knowed it was\
something in our way.\'92\
\
\'91You said it was Rudderford,\'92 observed Ham, laughing.\
\
\'91Well!\'92 retorted Mr. Peggotty. \'91And ye steer with a rudder, don\'92t ye? It\
ain\'92t fur off. How is he, sir?\'92\
\
\'91He was very well indeed when I came away, Mr. Peggotty.\'92\
\
\'91There\'92s a friend!\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, stretching out his pipe. \'91There\'92s\
a friend, if you talk of friends! Why, Lord love my heart alive, if it\
ain\'92t a treat to look at him!\'92\
\
\'91He is very handsome, is he not?\'92 said I, my heart warming with this\
praise.\
\
\'91Handsome!\'92 cried Mr. Peggotty. \'91He stands up to you like--like a--why I\
don\'92t know what he don\'92t stand up to you like. He\'92s so bold!\'92\
\
\'91Yes! That\'92s just his character,\'92 said I. \'91He\'92s as brave as a lion, and\
you can\'92t think how frank he is, Mr. Peggotty.\'92\
\
\'91And I do suppose, now,\'92 said Mr. Peggotty, looking at me through the\
smoke of his pipe, \'91that in the way of book-larning he\'92d take the wind\
out of a\'92most anything.\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said I, delighted; \'91he knows everything. He is astonishingly\
clever.\'92\
\
\'91There\'92s a friend!\'92 murmured Mr. Peggotty, with a grave toss of his\
head.\
\
\'91Nothing seems to cost him any trouble,\'92 said I. \'91He knows a task if he\
only looks at it. He is the best cricketer you ever saw. He will give\
you almost as many men as you like at draughts, and beat you easily.\'92\
\
Mr. Peggotty gave his head another toss, as much as to say: \'91Of course\
he will.\'92\
\
\'91He is such a speaker,\'92 I pursued, \'91that he can win anybody over; and I\
don\'92t know what you\'92d say if you were to hear him sing, Mr. Peggotty.\'92\
\
Mr. Peggotty gave his head another toss, as much as to say: \'91I have no\
doubt of it.\'92\
\
\'91Then, he\'92s such a generous, fine, noble fellow,\'92 said I, quite carried\
away by my favourite theme, \'91that it\'92s hardly possible to give him as\
much praise as he deserves. I am sure I can never feel thankful enough\
for the generosity with which he has protected me, so much younger and\
lower in the school than himself.\'92\
\
I was running on, very fast indeed, when my eyes rested on little\
Em\'92ly\'92s face, which was bent forward over the table, listening with the\
deepest attention, her breath held, her blue eyes sparkling like jewels,\
and the colour mantling in her cheeks. She looked so extraordinarily\
earnest and pretty, that I stopped in a sort of wonder; and they all\
observed her at the same time, for as I stopped, they laughed and looked\
at her.\
\
\'91Em\'92ly is like me,\'92 said Peggotty, \'91and would like to see him.\'92\
\
Em\'92ly was confused by our all observing her, and hung down her head,\
and her face was covered with blushes. Glancing up presently through her\
stray curls, and seeing that we were all looking at her still (I am sure\
I, for one, could have looked at her for hours), she ran away, and kept\
away till it was nearly bedtime.\
\
I lay down in the old little bed in the stern of the boat, and the wind\
came moaning on across the flat as it had done before. But I could not\
help fancying, now, that it moaned of those who were gone; and instead\
of thinking that the sea might rise in the night and float the boat\
away, I thought of the sea that had risen, since I last heard those\
sounds, and drowned my happy home. I recollect, as the wind and water\
began to sound fainter in my ears, putting a short clause into my\
prayers, petitioning that I might grow up to marry little Em\'92ly, and so\
dropping lovingly asleep.\
\
The days passed pretty much as they had passed before, except--it was\
a great exception--that little Em\'92ly and I seldom wandered on the beach\
now. She had tasks to learn, and needle-work to do; and was absent\
during a great part of each day. But I felt that we should not have had\
those old wanderings, even if it had been otherwise. Wild and full of\
childish whims as Em\'92ly was, she was more of a little woman than I\
had supposed. She seemed to have got a great distance away from me,\
in little more than a year. She liked me, but she laughed at me, and\
tormented me; and when I went to meet her, stole home another way, and\
was laughing at the door when I came back, disappointed. The best times\
were when she sat quietly at work in the doorway, and I sat on the\
wooden step at her feet, reading to her. It seems to me, at this\
hour, that I have never seen such sunlight as on those bright April\
afternoons; that I have never seen such a sunny little figure as I used\
to see, sitting in the doorway of the old boat; that I have never beheld\
such sky, such water, such glorified ships sailing away into golden air.\
\
On the very first evening after our arrival, Mr. Barkis appeared in an\
exceedingly vacant and awkward condition, and with a bundle of oranges\
tied up in a handkerchief. As he made no allusion of any kind to this\
property, he was supposed to have left it behind him by accident when\
he went away; until Ham, running after him to restore it, came back with\
the information that it was intended for Peggotty. After that occasion\
he appeared every evening at exactly the same hour, and always with a\
little bundle, to which he never alluded, and which he regularly put\
behind the door and left there. These offerings of affection were of a\
most various and eccentric description. Among them I remember a double\
set of pigs\'92 trotters, a huge pin-cushion, half a bushel or so of\
apples, a pair of jet earrings, some Spanish onions, a box of dominoes,\
a canary bird and cage, and a leg of pickled pork.\
\
Mr. Barkis\'92s wooing, as I remember it, was altogether of a peculiar\
kind. He very seldom said anything; but would sit by the fire in much\
the same attitude as he sat in his cart, and stare heavily at Peggotty,\
who was opposite. One night, being, as I suppose, inspired by love, he\
made a dart at the bit of wax-candle she kept for her thread, and put\
it in his waistcoat-pocket and carried it off. After that, his great\
delight was to produce it when it was wanted, sticking to the lining of\
his pocket, in a partially melted state, and pocket it again when it was\
done with. He seemed to enjoy himself very much, and not to feel at all\
called upon to talk. Even when he took Peggotty out for a walk on the\
flats, he had no uneasiness on that head, I believe; contenting himself\
with now and then asking her if she was pretty comfortable; and I\
remember that sometimes, after he was gone, Peggotty would throw her\
apron over her face, and laugh for half-an-hour. Indeed, we were\
all more or less amused, except that miserable Mrs. Gummidge, whose\
courtship would appear to have been of an exactly parallel nature, she\
was so continually reminded by these transactions of the old one.\
\
At length, when the term of my visit was nearly expired, it was given\
out that Peggotty and Mr. Barkis were going to make a day\'92s holiday\
together, and that little Em\'92ly and I were to accompany them. I had but\
a broken sleep the night before, in anticipation of the pleasure of\
a whole day with Em\'92ly. We were all astir betimes in the morning; and\
while we were yet at breakfast, Mr. Barkis appeared in the distance,\
driving a chaise-cart towards the object of his affections.\
\
Peggotty was dressed as usual, in her neat and quiet mourning; but Mr.\
Barkis bloomed in a new blue coat, of which the tailor had given him\
such good measure, that the cuffs would have rendered gloves unnecessary\
in the coldest weather, while the collar was so high that it pushed his\
hair up on end on the top of his head. His bright buttons, too, were\
of the largest size. Rendered complete by drab pantaloons and a buff\
waistcoat, I thought Mr. Barkis a phenomenon of respectability.\
\
When we were all in a bustle outside the door, I found that Mr. Peggotty\
was prepared with an old shoe, which was to be thrown after us for luck,\
and which he offered to Mrs. Gummidge for that purpose.\
\
\'91No. It had better be done by somebody else, Dan\'92l,\'92 said Mrs. Gummidge.\
\'91I\'92m a lone lorn creetur\'92 myself, and everythink that reminds me of\
creetur\'92s that ain\'92t lone and lorn, goes contrary with me.\'92\
\
\'91Come, old gal!\'92 cried Mr. Peggotty. \'91Take and heave it.\'92\
\
\'91No, Dan\'92l,\'92 returned Mrs. Gummidge, whimpering and shaking her head.\
\'91If I felt less, I could do more. You don\'92t feel like me, Dan\'92l; thinks\
don\'92t go contrary with you, nor you with them; you had better do it\
yourself.\'92\
\
But here Peggotty, who had been going about from one to another in a\
hurried way, kissing everybody, called out from the cart, in which we\
all were by this time (Em\'92ly and I on two little chairs, side by side),\
that Mrs. Gummidge must do it. So Mrs. Gummidge did it; and, I am sorry\
to relate, cast a damp upon the festive character of our departure, by\
immediately bursting into tears, and sinking subdued into the arms of\
Ham, with the declaration that she knowed she was a burden, and had\
better be carried to the House at once. Which I really thought was a\
sensible idea, that Ham might have acted on.\
\
Away we went, however, on our holiday excursion; and the first thing\
we did was to stop at a church, where Mr. Barkis tied the horse to some\
rails, and went in with Peggotty, leaving little Em\'92ly and me alone in\
the chaise. I took that occasion to put my arm round Em\'92ly\'92s waist, and\
propose that as I was going away so very soon now, we should determine\
to be very affectionate to one another, and very happy, all day. Little\
Em\'92ly consenting, and allowing me to kiss her, I became desperate;\
informing her, I recollect, that I never could love another, and that\
I was prepared to shed the blood of anybody who should aspire to her\
affections.\
\
How merry little Em\'92ly made herself about it! With what a demure\
assumption of being immensely older and wiser than I, the fairy little\
woman said I was \'91a silly boy\'92; and then laughed so charmingly that\
I forgot the pain of being called by that disparaging name, in the\
pleasure of looking at her.\
\
Mr. Barkis and Peggotty were a good while in the church, but came out at\
last, and then we drove away into the country. As we were going along,\
Mr. Barkis turned to me, and said, with a wink,--by the by, I should\
hardly have thought, before, that he could wink:\
\
\'91What name was it as I wrote up in the cart?\'92\
\
\'91Clara Peggotty,\'92 I answered.\
\
\'91What name would it be as I should write up now, if there was a tilt\
here?\'92\
\
\'91Clara Peggotty, again?\'92 I suggested.\
\
\'91Clara Peggotty BARKIS!\'92 he returned, and burst into a roar of laughter\
that shook the chaise.\
\
In a word, they were married, and had gone into the church for no other\
purpose. Peggotty was resolved that it should be quietly done; and\
the clerk had given her away, and there had been no witnesses of the\
ceremony. She was a little confused when Mr. Barkis made this abrupt\
announcement of their union, and could not hug me enough in token of her\
unimpaired affection; but she soon became herself again, and said she\
was very glad it was over.\
\
We drove to a little inn in a by-road, where we were expected, and\
where we had a very comfortable dinner, and passed the day with great\
satisfaction. If Peggotty had been married every day for the last ten\
years, she could hardly have been more at her ease about it; it made no\
sort of difference in her: she was just the same as ever, and went\
out for a stroll with little Em\'92ly and me before tea, while Mr. Barkis\
philosophically smoked his pipe, and enjoyed himself, I suppose, with\
the contemplation of his happiness. If so, it sharpened his appetite;\
for I distinctly call to mind that, although he had eaten a good deal of\
pork and greens at dinner, and had finished off with a fowl or two, he\
was obliged to have cold boiled bacon for tea, and disposed of a large\
quantity without any emotion.\
\
I have often thought, since, what an odd, innocent, out-of-the-way kind\
of wedding it must have been! We got into the chaise again soon after\
dark, and drove cosily back, looking up at the stars, and talking about\
them. I was their chief exponent, and opened Mr. Barkis\'92s mind to\
an amazing extent. I told him all I knew, but he would have believed\
anything I might have taken it into my head to impart to him; for he\
had a profound veneration for my abilities, and informed his wife in my\
hearing, on that very occasion, that I was \'91a young Roeshus\'92--by which I\
think he meant prodigy.\
\
When we had exhausted the subject of the stars, or rather when I had\
exhausted the mental faculties of Mr. Barkis, little Em\'92ly and I made a\
cloak of an old wrapper, and sat under it for the rest of the journey.\
Ah, how I loved her! What happiness (I thought) if we were married,\
and were going away anywhere to live among the trees and in the fields,\
never growing older, never growing wiser, children ever, rambling hand\
in hand through sunshine and among flowery meadows, laying down our\
heads on moss at night, in a sweet sleep of purity and peace, and buried\
by the birds when we were dead! Some such picture, with no real world in\
it, bright with the light of our innocence, and vague as the stars afar\
off, was in my mind all the way. I am glad to think there were two such\
guileless hearts at Peggotty\'92s marriage as little Em\'92ly\'92s and mine. I\
am glad to think the Loves and Graces took such airy forms in its homely\
procession.\
\
Well, we came to the old boat again in good time at night; and there\
Mr. and Mrs. Barkis bade us good-bye, and drove away snugly to their\
own home. I felt then, for the first time, that I had lost Peggotty. I\
should have gone to bed with a sore heart indeed under any other roof\
but that which sheltered little Em\'92ly\'92s head.\
\
Mr. Peggotty and Ham knew what was in my thoughts as well as I did, and\
were ready with some supper and their hospitable faces to drive it away.\
Little Em\'92ly came and sat beside me on the locker for the only time in\
all that visit; and it was altogether a wonderful close to a wonderful\
day.\
\
It was a night tide; and soon after we went to bed, Mr. Peggotty and Ham\
went out to fish. I felt very brave at being left alone in the solitary\
house, the protector of Em\'92ly and Mrs. Gummidge, and only wished that\
a lion or a serpent, or any ill-disposed monster, would make an attack\
upon us, that I might destroy him, and cover myself with glory. But as\
nothing of the sort happened to be walking about on Yarmouth flats that\
night, I provided the best substitute I could by dreaming of dragons\
until morning.\
\
With morning came Peggotty; who called to me, as usual, under my window\
as if Mr. Barkis the carrier had been from first to last a dream too.\
After breakfast she took me to her own home, and a beautiful little\
home it was. Of all the moveables in it, I must have been impressed by\
a certain old bureau of some dark wood in the parlour (the tile-floored\
kitchen was the general sitting-room), with a retreating top which\
opened, let down, and became a desk, within which was a large quarto\
edition of Foxe\'92s Book of Martyrs. This precious volume, of which I do\
not recollect one word, I immediately discovered and immediately applied\
myself to; and I never visited the house afterwards, but I kneeled on\
a chair, opened the casket where this gem was enshrined, spread my arms\
over the desk, and fell to devouring the book afresh. I was chiefly\
edified, I am afraid, by the pictures, which were numerous, and\
represented all kinds of dismal horrors; but the Martyrs and Peggotty\'92s\
house have been inseparable in my mind ever since, and are now.\
\
I took leave of Mr. Peggotty, and Ham, and Mrs. Gummidge, and little\
Em\'92ly, that day; and passed the night at Peggotty\'92s, in a little room\
in the roof (with the Crocodile Book on a shelf by the bed\'92s head) which\
was to be always mine, Peggotty said, and should always be kept for me\
in exactly the same state.\
\
\'91Young or old, Davy dear, as long as I am alive and have this house over\
my head,\'92 said Peggotty, \'91you shall find it as if I expected you here\
directly minute. I shall keep it every day, as I used to keep your old\
little room, my darling; and if you was to go to China, you might think\
of it as being kept just the same, all the time you were away.\'92\
\
I felt the truth and constancy of my dear old nurse, with all my heart,\
and thanked her as well as I could. That was not very well, for she\
spoke to me thus, with her arms round my neck, in the morning, and I was\
going home in the morning, and I went home in the morning, with herself\
and Mr. Barkis in the cart. They left me at the gate, not easily or\
lightly; and it was a strange sight to me to see the cart go on, taking\
Peggotty away, and leaving me under the old elm-trees looking at the\
house, in which there was no face to look on mine with love or liking\
any more.\
\
And now I fell into a state of neglect, which I cannot look back upon\
without compassion. I fell at once into a solitary condition,--apart\
from all friendly notice, apart from the society of all other boys of\
my own age, apart from all companionship but my own spiritless\
thoughts,--which seems to cast its gloom upon this paper as I write.\
\
What would I have given, to have been sent to the hardest school that\
ever was kept!--to have been taught something, anyhow, anywhere! No\
such hope dawned upon me. They disliked me; and they sullenly, sternly,\
steadily, overlooked me. I think Mr. Murdstone\'92s means were straitened\
at about this time; but it is little to the purpose. He could not bear\
me; and in putting me from him he tried, as I believe, to put away the\
notion that I had any claim upon him--and succeeded.\
\
I was not actively ill-used. I was not beaten, or starved; but the wrong\
that was done to me had no intervals of relenting, and was done in a\
systematic, passionless manner. Day after day, week after week, month\
after month, I was coldly neglected. I wonder sometimes, when I think\
of it, what they would have done if I had been taken with an illness;\
whether I should have lain down in my lonely room, and languished\
through it in my usual solitary way, or whether anybody would have\
helped me out.\
\
When Mr. and Miss Murdstone were at home, I took my meals with them; in\
their absence, I ate and drank by myself. At all times I lounged about\
the house and neighbourhood quite disregarded, except that they were\
jealous of my making any friends: thinking, perhaps, that if I did, I\
might complain to someone. For this reason, though Mr. Chillip often\
asked me to go and see him (he was a widower, having, some years before\
that, lost a little small light-haired wife, whom I can just remember\
connecting in my own thoughts with a pale tortoise-shell cat), it was\
but seldom that I enjoyed the happiness of passing an afternoon in his\
closet of a surgery; reading some book that was new to me, with\
the smell of the whole Pharmacopoeia coming up my nose, or pounding\
something in a mortar under his mild directions.\
\
For the same reason, added no doubt to the old dislike of her, I was\
seldom allowed to visit Peggotty. Faithful to her promise, she either\
came to see me, or met me somewhere near, once every week, and never\
empty-handed; but many and bitter were the disappointments I had, in\
being refused permission to pay a visit to her at her house. Some few\
times, however, at long intervals, I was allowed to go there; and then\
I found out that Mr. Barkis was something of a miser, or as Peggotty\
dutifully expressed it, was \'91a little near\'92, and kept a heap of money\
in a box under his bed, which he pretended was only full of coats\
and trousers. In this coffer, his riches hid themselves with such a\
tenacious modesty, that the smallest instalments could only be tempted\
out by artifice; so that Peggotty had to prepare a long and elaborate\
scheme, a very Gunpowder Plot, for every Saturday\'92s expenses.\
\
All this time I was so conscious of the waste of any promise I had\
given, and of my being utterly neglected, that I should have been\
perfectly miserable, I have no doubt, but for the old books. They were\
my only comfort; and I was as true to them as they were to me, and read\
them over and over I don\'92t know how many times more.\
\
I now approach a period of my life, which I can never lose the\
remembrance of, while I remember anything: and the recollection of\
which has often, without my invocation, come before me like a ghost, and\
haunted happier times.\
\
I had been out, one day, loitering somewhere, in the listless,\
meditative manner that my way of life engendered, when, turning the\
corner of a lane near our house, I came upon Mr. Murdstone walking with\
a gentleman. I was confused, and was going by them, when the gentleman\
cried:\
\
\'91What! Brooks!\'92\
\
\'91No, sir, David Copperfield,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Don\'92t tell me. You are Brooks,\'92 said the gentleman. \'91You are Brooks of\
Sheffield. That\'92s your name.\'92\
\
At these words, I observed the gentleman more attentively. His laugh\
coming to my remembrance too, I knew him to be Mr. Quinion, whom I\
had gone over to Lowestoft with Mr. Murdstone to see, before--it is no\
matter--I need not recall when.\
\
\'91And how do you get on, and where are you being educated, Brooks?\'92 said\
Mr. Quinion.\
\
He had put his hand upon my shoulder, and turned me about, to walk\
with them. I did not know what to reply, and glanced dubiously at Mr.\
Murdstone.\
\
\'91He is at home at present,\'92 said the latter. \'91He is not being educated\
anywhere. I don\'92t know what to do with him. He is a difficult subject.\'92\
\
That old, double look was on me for a moment; and then his eyes darkened\
with a frown, as it turned, in its aversion, elsewhere.\
\
\'91Humph!\'92 said Mr. Quinion, looking at us both, I thought. \'91Fine\
weather!\'92\
\
Silence ensued, and I was considering how I could best disengage my\
shoulder from his hand, and go away, when he said:\
\
\'91I suppose you are a pretty sharp fellow still? Eh, Brooks?\'92\
\
\'91Aye! He is sharp enough,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, impatiently. \'91You had\
better let him go. He will not thank you for troubling him.\'92\
\
On this hint, Mr. Quinion released me, and I made the best of my\
way home. Looking back as I turned into the front garden, I saw Mr.\
Murdstone leaning against the wicket of the churchyard, and Mr. Quinion\
talking to him. They were both looking after me, and I felt that they\
were speaking of me.\
\
Mr. Quinion lay at our house that night. After breakfast, the next\
morning, I had put my chair away, and was going out of the room, when\
Mr. Murdstone called me back. He then gravely repaired to another table,\
where his sister sat herself at her desk. Mr. Quinion, with his hands\
in his pockets, stood looking out of window; and I stood looking at them\
all.\
\
\'91David,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, \'91to the young this is a world for action;\
not for moping and droning in.\'92 --\'91As you do,\'92 added his sister.\
\
\'91Jane Murdstone, leave it to me, if you please. I say, David, to the\
young this is a world for action, and not for moping and droning in. It\
is especially so for a young boy of your disposition, which requires a\
great deal of correcting; and to which no greater service can be done\
than to force it to conform to the ways of the working world, and to\
bend it and break it.\'92\
\
\'91For stubbornness won\'92t do here,\'92 said his sister \'91What it wants is, to\
be crushed. And crushed it must be. Shall be, too!\'92\
\
He gave her a look, half in remonstrance, half in approval, and went on:\
\
\'91I suppose you know, David, that I am not rich. At any rate, you know it\
now. You have received some considerable education already. Education is\
costly; and even if it were not, and I could afford it, I am of opinion\
that it would not be at all advantageous to you to be kept at school.\
What is before you, is a fight with the world; and the sooner you begin\
it, the better.\'92\
\
I think it occurred to me that I had already begun it, in my poor way:\
but it occurs to me now, whether or no.\
\
\'91You have heard the \'93counting-house\'94 mentioned sometimes,\'92 said Mr.\
Murdstone.\
\
\'91The counting-house, sir?\'92 I repeated. \'91Of Murdstone and Grinby, in the\
wine trade,\'92 he replied.\
\
I suppose I looked uncertain, for he went on hastily:\
\
\'91You have heard the \'93counting-house\'94 mentioned, or the business, or the\
cellars, or the wharf, or something about it.\'92\
\
\'91I think I have heard the business mentioned, sir,\'92 I said, remembering\
what I vaguely knew of his and his sister\'92s resources. \'91But I don\'92t know\
when.\'92\
\
\'91It does not matter when,\'92 he returned. \'91Mr. Quinion manages that\
business.\'92\
\
I glanced at the latter deferentially as he stood looking out of window.\
\
\'91Mr. Quinion suggests that it gives employment to some other boys,\
and that he sees no reason why it shouldn\'92t, on the same terms, give\
employment to you.\'92\
\
\'91He having,\'92 Mr. Quinion observed in a low voice, and half turning\
round, \'91no other prospect, Murdstone.\'92\
\
Mr. Murdstone, with an impatient, even an angry gesture, resumed,\
without noticing what he had said:\
\
\'91Those terms are, that you will earn enough for yourself to provide for\
your eating and drinking, and pocket-money. Your lodging (which I have\
arranged for) will be paid by me. So will your washing--\'92\
\
\'91--Which will be kept down to my estimate,\'92 said his sister.\
\
\'91Your clothes will be looked after for you, too,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone;\
\'91as you will not be able, yet awhile, to get them for yourself. So you\
are now going to London, David, with Mr. Quinion, to begin the world on\
your own account.\'92\
\
\'91In short, you are provided for,\'92 observed his sister; \'91and will please\
to do your duty.\'92\
\
Though I quite understood that the purpose of this announcement was\
to get rid of me, I have no distinct remembrance whether it pleased\
or frightened me. My impression is, that I was in a state of confusion\
about it, and, oscillating between the two points, touched neither. Nor\
had I much time for the clearing of my thoughts, as Mr. Quinion was to\
go upon the morrow.\
\
Behold me, on the morrow, in a much-worn little white hat, with a black\
crape round it for my mother, a black jacket, and a pair of hard, stiff\
corduroy trousers--which Miss Murdstone considered the best armour for\
the legs in that fight with the world which was now to come off. Behold\
me so attired, and with my little worldly all before me in a small\
trunk, sitting, a lone lorn child (as Mrs. Gummidge might have said),\
in the post-chaise that was carrying Mr. Quinion to the London coach at\
Yarmouth! See, how our house and church are lessening in the distance;\
how the grave beneath the tree is blotted out by intervening objects;\
how the spire points upwards from my old playground no more, and the sky\
is empty!\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 11. I BEGIN LIFE ON MY OWN ACCOUNT, AND DON\'92T LIKE IT\
\
\
I know enough of the world now, to have almost lost the capacity of\
being much surprised by anything; but it is matter of some surprise to\
me, even now, that I can have been so easily thrown away at such an age.\
A child of excellent abilities, and with strong powers of observation,\
quick, eager, delicate, and soon hurt bodily or mentally, it seems\
wonderful to me that nobody should have made any sign in my behalf. But\
none was made; and I became, at ten years old, a little labouring hind\
in the service of Murdstone and Grinby.\
\
Murdstone and Grinby\'92s warehouse was at the waterside. It was down in\
Blackfriars. Modern improvements have altered the place; but it was the\
last house at the bottom of a narrow street, curving down hill to the\
river, with some stairs at the end, where people took boat. It was a\
crazy old house with a wharf of its own, abutting on the water when the\
tide was in, and on the mud when the tide was out, and literally overrun\
with rats. Its panelled rooms, discoloured with the dirt and smoke of\
a hundred years, I dare say; its decaying floors and staircase; the\
squeaking and scuffling of the old grey rats down in the cellars; and\
the dirt and rottenness of the place; are things, not of many years ago,\
in my mind, but of the present instant. They are all before me, just as\
they were in the evil hour when I went among them for the first time,\
with my trembling hand in Mr. Quinion\'92s.\
\
Murdstone and Grinby\'92s trade was among a good many kinds of people, but\
an important branch of it was the supply of wines and spirits to certain\
packet ships. I forget now where they chiefly went, but I think there\
were some among them that made voyages both to the East and West Indies.\
I know that a great many empty bottles were one of the consequences of\
this traffic, and that certain men and boys were employed to examine\
them against the light, and reject those that were flawed, and to rinse\
and wash them. When the empty bottles ran short, there were labels to be\
pasted on full ones, or corks to be fitted to them, or seals to be put\
upon the corks, or finished bottles to be packed in casks. All this work\
was my work, and of the boys employed upon it I was one.\
\
There were three or four of us, counting me. My working place was\
established in a corner of the warehouse, where Mr. Quinion could see\
me, when he chose to stand up on the bottom rail of his stool in the\
counting-house, and look at me through a window above the desk. Hither,\
on the first morning of my so auspiciously beginning life on my own\
account, the oldest of the regular boys was summoned to show me my\
business. His name was Mick Walker, and he wore a ragged apron and a\
paper cap. He informed me that his father was a bargeman, and walked, in\
a black velvet head-dress, in the Lord Mayor\'92s Show. He also informed me\
that our principal associate would be another boy whom he introduced by\
the--to me--extraordinary name of Mealy Potatoes. I discovered, however,\
that this youth had not been christened by that name, but that it had\
been bestowed upon him in the warehouse, on account of his complexion,\
which was pale or mealy. Mealy\'92s father was a waterman, who had the\
additional distinction of being a fireman, and was engaged as such at\
one of the large theatres; where some young relation of Mealy\'92s--I think\
his little sister--did Imps in the Pantomimes.\
\
No words can express the secret agony of my soul as I sunk into this\
companionship; compared these henceforth everyday associates with those\
of my happier childhood--not to say with Steerforth, Traddles, and the\
rest of those boys; and felt my hopes of growing up to be a learned\
and distinguished man, crushed in my bosom. The deep remembrance of the\
sense I had, of being utterly without hope now; of the shame I felt in\
my position; of the misery it was to my young heart to believe that day\
by day what I had learned, and thought, and delighted in, and raised my\
fancy and my emulation up by, would pass away from me, little by little,\
never to be brought back any more; cannot be written. As often as Mick\
Walker went away in the course of that forenoon, I mingled my tears with\
the water in which I was washing the bottles; and sobbed as if there\
were a flaw in my own breast, and it were in danger of bursting.\
\
The counting-house clock was at half past twelve, and there was\
general preparation for going to dinner, when Mr. Quinion tapped at the\
counting-house window, and beckoned to me to go in. I went in, and\
found there a stoutish, middle-aged person, in a brown surtout and black\
tights and shoes, with no more hair upon his head (which was a large\
one, and very shining) than there is upon an egg, and with a very\
extensive face, which he turned full upon me. His clothes were shabby,\
but he had an imposing shirt-collar on. He carried a jaunty sort of a\
stick, with a large pair of rusty tassels to it; and a quizzing-glass\
hung outside his coat,--for ornament, I afterwards found, as he very\
seldom looked through it, and couldn\'92t see anything when he did.\
\
\'91This,\'92 said Mr. Quinion, in allusion to myself, \'91is he.\'92\
\
\'91This,\'92 said the stranger, with a certain condescending roll in his\
voice, and a certain indescribable air of doing something genteel, which\
impressed me very much, \'91is Master Copperfield. I hope I see you well,\
sir?\'92\
\
I said I was very well, and hoped he was. I was sufficiently ill at\
ease, Heaven knows; but it was not in my nature to complain much at that\
time of my life, so I said I was very well, and hoped he was.\
\
\'91I am,\'92 said the stranger, \'91thank Heaven, quite well. I have received a\
letter from Mr. Murdstone, in which he mentions that he would desire\
me to receive into an apartment in the rear of my house, which is at\
present unoccupied--and is, in short, to be let as a--in short,\'92\
said the stranger, with a smile and in a burst of confidence, \'91as a\
bedroom--the young beginner whom I have now the pleasure to--\'92 and the\
stranger waved his hand, and settled his chin in his shirt-collar.\
\
\'91This is Mr. Micawber,\'92 said Mr. Quinion to me.\
\
\'91Ahem!\'92 said the stranger, \'91that is my name.\'92\
\
\'91Mr. Micawber,\'92 said Mr. Quinion, \'91is known to Mr. Murdstone. He takes\
orders for us on commission, when he can get any. He has been written to\
by Mr. Murdstone, on the subject of your lodgings, and he will receive\
you as a lodger.\'92\
\
\'91My address,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91is Windsor Terrace, City Road. I--in\
short,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, with the same genteel air, and in another\
burst of confidence--\'91I live there.\'92\
\
I made him a bow.\
\
\'91Under the impression,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91that your peregrinations in\
this metropolis have not as yet been extensive, and that you might have\
some difficulty in penetrating the arcana of the Modern Babylon in the\
direction of the City Road,--in short,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, in another\
burst of confidence, \'91that you might lose yourself--I shall be happy to\
call this evening, and install you in the knowledge of the nearest way.\'92\
\
I thanked him with all my heart, for it was friendly in him to offer to\
take that trouble.\
\
\'91At what hour,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91shall I--\'92\
\
\'91At about eight,\'92 said Mr. Quinion.\
\
\'91At about eight,\'92 said Mr. Micawber. \'91I beg to wish you good day, Mr.\
Quinion. I will intrude no longer.\'92\
\
So he put on his hat, and went out with his cane under his arm: very\
upright, and humming a tune when he was clear of the counting-house.\
\
Mr. Quinion then formally engaged me to be as useful as I could in\
the warehouse of Murdstone and Grinby, at a salary, I think, of six\
shillings a week. I am not clear whether it was six or seven. I am\
inclined to believe, from my uncertainty on this head, that it was six\
at first and seven afterwards. He paid me a week down (from his own\
pocket, I believe), and I gave Mealy sixpence out of it to get my\
trunk carried to Windsor Terrace that night: it being too heavy for my\
strength, small as it was. I paid sixpence more for my dinner, which was\
a meat pie and a turn at a neighbouring pump; and passed the hour which\
was allowed for that meal, in walking about the streets.\
\
At the appointed time in the evening, Mr. Micawber reappeared. I washed\
my hands and face, to do the greater honour to his gentility, and we\
walked to our house, as I suppose I must now call it, together; Mr.\
Micawber impressing the name of streets, and the shapes of corner houses\
upon me, as we went along, that I might find my way back, easily, in the\
morning.\
\
Arrived at this house in Windsor Terrace (which I noticed was shabby\
like himself, but also, like himself, made all the show it could), he\
presented me to Mrs. Micawber, a thin and faded lady, not at all\
young, who was sitting in the parlour (the first floor was altogether\
unfurnished, and the blinds were kept down to delude the neighbours),\
with a baby at her breast. This baby was one of twins; and I may remark\
here that I hardly ever, in all my experience of the family, saw both\
the twins detached from Mrs. Micawber at the same time. One of them was\
always taking refreshment.\
\
There were two other children; Master Micawber, aged about four, and\
Miss Micawber, aged about three. These, and a dark-complexioned young\
woman, with a habit of snorting, who was servant to the family, and\
informed me, before half an hour had expired, that she was \'91a Orfling\'92,\
and came from St. Luke\'92s workhouse, in the neighbourhood, completed the\
establishment. My room was at the top of the house, at the back: a close\
chamber; stencilled all over with an ornament which my young imagination\
represented as a blue muffin; and very scantily furnished.\
\
\'91I never thought,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, when she came up, twin and all,\
to show me the apartment, and sat down to take breath, \'91before I was\
married, when I lived with papa and mama, that I should ever find it\
necessary to take a lodger. But Mr. Micawber being in difficulties, all\
considerations of private feeling must give way.\'92\
\
I said: \'91Yes, ma\'92am.\'92\
\
\'91Mr. Micawber\'92s difficulties are almost overwhelming just at present,\'92\
said Mrs. Micawber; \'91and whether it is possible to bring him through\
them, I don\'92t know. When I lived at home with papa and mama, I really\
should have hardly understood what the word meant, in the sense in which\
I now employ it, but experientia does it,--as papa used to say.\'92\
\
I cannot satisfy myself whether she told me that Mr. Micawber had been\
an officer in the Marines, or whether I have imagined it. I only know\
that I believe to this hour that he WAS in the Marines once upon a time,\
without knowing why. He was a sort of town traveller for a number\
of miscellaneous houses, now; but made little or nothing of it, I am\
afraid.\
\
\'91If Mr. Micawber\'92s creditors will not give him time,\'92 said Mrs.\
Micawber, \'91they must take the consequences; and the sooner they bring it\
to an issue the better. Blood cannot be obtained from a stone, neither\
can anything on account be obtained at present (not to mention law\
expenses) from Mr. Micawber.\'92\
\
I never can quite understand whether my precocious self-dependence\
confused Mrs. Micawber in reference to my age, or whether she was so\
full of the subject that she would have talked about it to the very\
twins if there had been nobody else to communicate with, but this was\
the strain in which she began, and she went on accordingly all the time\
I knew her.\
\
Poor Mrs. Micawber! She said she had tried to exert herself, and so,\
I have no doubt, she had. The centre of the street door was perfectly\
covered with a great brass-plate, on which was engraved \'91Mrs. Micawber\'92s\
Boarding Establishment for Young Ladies\'92: but I never found that any\
young lady had ever been to school there; or that any young lady ever\
came, or proposed to come; or that the least preparation was ever made\
to receive any young lady. The only visitors I ever saw, or heard of,\
were creditors. THEY used to come at all hours, and some of them were\
quite ferocious. One dirty-faced man, I think he was a boot-maker,\
used to edge himself into the passage as early as seven o\'92clock in the\
morning, and call up the stairs to Mr. Micawber--\'91Come! You ain\'92t out\
yet, you know. Pay us, will you? Don\'92t hide, you know; that\'92s mean. I\
wouldn\'92t be mean if I was you. Pay us, will you? You just pay us, d\'92ye\
hear? Come!\'92 Receiving no answer to these taunts, he would mount in\
his wrath to the words \'91swindlers\'92 and \'91robbers\'92; and these being\
ineffectual too, would sometimes go to the extremity of crossing the\
street, and roaring up at the windows of the second floor, where he knew\
Mr. Micawber was. At these times, Mr. Micawber would be transported with\
grief and mortification, even to the length (as I was once made aware by\
a scream from his wife) of making motions at himself with a razor;\
but within half-an-hour afterwards, he would polish up his shoes with\
extraordinary pains, and go out, humming a tune with a greater air of\
gentility than ever. Mrs. Micawber was quite as elastic. I have known\
her to be thrown into fainting fits by the king\'92s taxes at three\
o\'92clock, and to eat lamb chops, breaded, and drink warm ale (paid for\
with two tea-spoons that had gone to the pawnbroker\'92s) at four. On one\
occasion, when an execution had just been put in, coming home through\
some chance as early as six o\'92clock, I saw her lying (of course with a\
twin) under the grate in a swoon, with her hair all torn about her face;\
but I never knew her more cheerful than she was, that very same night,\
over a veal cutlet before the kitchen fire, telling me stories about her\
papa and mama, and the company they used to keep.\
\
In this house, and with this family, I passed my leisure time. My own\
exclusive breakfast of a penny loaf and a pennyworth of milk, I provided\
myself. I kept another small loaf, and a modicum of cheese, on a\
particular shelf of a particular cupboard, to make my supper on when I\
came back at night. This made a hole in the six or seven shillings, I\
know well; and I was out at the warehouse all day, and had to support\
myself on that money all the week. From Monday morning until Saturday\
night, I had no advice, no counsel, no encouragement, no consolation,\
no assistance, no support, of any kind, from anyone, that I can call to\
mind, as I hope to go to heaven!\
\
I was so young and childish, and so little qualified--how could I be\
otherwise?--to undertake the whole charge of my own existence, that\
often, in going to Murdstone and Grinby\'92s, of a morning, I could\
not resist the stale pastry put out for sale at half-price at the\
pastrycooks\'92 doors, and spent in that the money I should have kept for\
my dinner. Then, I went without my dinner, or bought a roll or a slice\
of pudding. I remember two pudding shops, between which I was divided,\
according to my finances. One was in a court close to St. Martin\'92s\
Church--at the back of the church,--which is now removed altogether.\
The pudding at that shop was made of currants, and was rather a special\
pudding, but was dear, twopennyworth not being larger than a pennyworth\
of more ordinary pudding. A good shop for the latter was in the\
Strand--somewhere in that part which has been rebuilt since. It was a\
stout pale pudding, heavy and flabby, and with great flat raisins in it,\
stuck in whole at wide distances apart. It came up hot at about my time\
every day, and many a day did I dine off it. When I dined regularly and\
handsomely, I had a saveloy and a penny loaf, or a fourpenny plate of\
red beef from a cook\'92s shop; or a plate of bread and cheese and a\
glass of beer, from a miserable old public-house opposite our place of\
business, called the Lion, or the Lion and something else that I have\
forgotten. Once, I remember carrying my own bread (which I had brought\
from home in the morning) under my arm, wrapped in a piece of paper,\
like a book, and going to a famous alamode beef-house near Drury Lane,\
and ordering a \'91small plate\'92 of that delicacy to eat with it. What the\
waiter thought of such a strange little apparition coming in all alone,\
I don\'92t know; but I can see him now, staring at me as I ate my dinner,\
and bringing up the other waiter to look. I gave him a halfpenny for\
himself, and I wish he hadn\'92t taken it.\
\
We had half-an-hour, I think, for tea. When I had money enough, I used\
to get half-a-pint of ready-made coffee and a slice of bread and butter.\
When I had none, I used to look at a venison shop in Fleet Street; or\
I have strolled, at such a time, as far as Covent Garden Market, and\
stared at the pineapples. I was fond of wandering about the Adelphi,\
because it was a mysterious place, with those dark arches. I see myself\
emerging one evening from some of these arches, on a little public-house\
close to the river, with an open space before it, where some\
coal-heavers were dancing; to look at whom I sat down upon a bench. I\
wonder what they thought of me!\
\
I was such a child, and so little, that frequently when I went into the\
bar of a strange public-house for a glass of ale or porter, to moisten\
what I had had for dinner, they were afraid to give it me. I remember\
one hot evening I went into the bar of a public-house, and said to the\
landlord: \'91What is your best--your very best--ale a glass?\'92 For it was a\
special occasion. I don\'92t know what. It may have been my birthday.\
\
\'91Twopence-halfpenny,\'92 says the landlord, \'91is the price of the Genuine\
Stunning ale.\'92\
\
\'91Then,\'92 says I, producing the money, \'91just draw me a glass of the\
Genuine Stunning, if you please, with a good head to it.\'92\
\
The landlord looked at me in return over the bar, from head to foot,\
with a strange smile on his face; and instead of drawing the beer,\
looked round the screen and said something to his wife. She came out\
from behind it, with her work in her hand, and joined him in surveying\
me. Here we stand, all three, before me now. The landlord in his\
shirt-sleeves, leaning against the bar window-frame; his wife looking\
over the little half-door; and I, in some confusion, looking up at them\
from outside the partition. They asked me a good many questions; as,\
what my name was, how old I was, where I lived, how I was employed,\
and how I came there. To all of which, that I might commit nobody, I\
invented, I am afraid, appropriate answers. They served me with the ale,\
though I suspect it was not the Genuine Stunning; and the landlord\'92s\
wife, opening the little half-door of the bar, and bending down, gave\
me my money back, and gave me a kiss that was half admiring and half\
compassionate, but all womanly and good, I am sure.\
\
I know I do not exaggerate, unconsciously and unintentionally, the\
scantiness of my resources or the difficulties of my life. I know that\
if a shilling were given me by Mr. Quinion at any time, I spent it in\
a dinner or a tea. I know that I worked, from morning until night, with\
common men and boys, a shabby child. I know that I lounged about the\
streets, insufficiently and unsatisfactorily fed. I know that, but for\
the mercy of God, I might easily have been, for any care that was taken\
of me, a little robber or a little vagabond.\
\
Yet I held some station at Murdstone and Grinby\'92s too. Besides that Mr.\
Quinion did what a careless man so occupied, and dealing with a thing so\
anomalous, could, to treat me as one upon a different footing from the\
rest, I never said, to man or boy, how it was that I came to be there,\
or gave the least indication of being sorry that I was there. That I\
suffered in secret, and that I suffered exquisitely, no one ever knew\
but I. How much I suffered, it is, as I have said already, utterly\
beyond my power to tell. But I kept my own counsel, and I did my work.\
I knew from the first, that, if I could not do my work as well as any\
of the rest, I could not hold myself above slight and contempt. I soon\
became at least as expeditious and as skilful as either of the other\
boys. Though perfectly familiar with them, my conduct and manner were\
different enough from theirs to place a space between us. They and\
the men generally spoke of me as \'91the little gent\'92, or \'91the young\
Suffolker.\'92 A certain man named Gregory, who was foreman of the packers,\
and another named Tipp, who was the carman, and wore a red jacket, used\
to address me sometimes as \'91David\'92: but I think it was mostly when we\
were very confidential, and when I had made some efforts to entertain\
them, over our work, with some results of the old readings; which were\
fast perishing out of my remembrance. Mealy Potatoes uprose once, and\
rebelled against my being so distinguished; but Mick Walker settled him\
in no time.\
\
My rescue from this kind of existence I considered quite hopeless, and\
abandoned, as such, altogether. I am solemnly convinced that I never for\
one hour was reconciled to it, or was otherwise than miserably unhappy;\
but I bore it; and even to Peggotty, partly for the love of her and\
partly for shame, never in any letter (though many passed between us)\
revealed the truth.\
\
Mr. Micawber\'92s difficulties were an addition to the distressed state of\
my mind. In my forlorn state I became quite attached to the family, and\
used to walk about, busy with Mrs. Micawber\'92s calculations of ways and\
means, and heavy with the weight of Mr. Micawber\'92s debts. On a Saturday\
night, which was my grand treat,--partly because it was a great thing\
to walk home with six or seven shillings in my pocket, looking into the\
shops and thinking what such a sum would buy, and partly because I went\
home early,--Mrs. Micawber would make the most heart-rending confidences\
to me; also on a Sunday morning, when I mixed the portion of tea or\
coffee I had bought over-night, in a little shaving-pot, and sat late\
at my breakfast. It was nothing at all unusual for Mr. Micawber to sob\
violently at the beginning of one of these Saturday night conversations,\
and sing about Jack\'92s delight being his lovely Nan, towards the end of\
it. I have known him come home to supper with a flood of tears, and a\
declaration that nothing was now left but a jail; and go to bed making a\
calculation of the expense of putting bow-windows to the house, \'91in\
case anything turned up\'92, which was his favourite expression. And Mrs.\
Micawber was just the same.\
\
A curious equality of friendship, originating, I suppose, in our\
respective circumstances, sprung up between me and these people,\
notwithstanding the ludicrous disparity in our years. But I never\
allowed myself to be prevailed upon to accept any invitation to eat and\
drink with them out of their stock (knowing that they got on badly with\
the butcher and baker, and had often not too much for themselves),\
until Mrs. Micawber took me into her entire confidence. This she did one\
evening as follows:\
\
\'91Master Copperfield,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, \'91I make no stranger of you,\
and therefore do not hesitate to say that Mr. Micawber\'92s difficulties\
are coming to a crisis.\'92\
\
It made me very miserable to hear it, and I looked at Mrs. Micawber\'92s\
red eyes with the utmost sympathy.\
\
\'91With the exception of the heel of a Dutch cheese--which is not adapted\
to the wants of a young family\'92--said Mrs. Micawber, \'91there is really\
not a scrap of anything in the larder. I was accustomed to speak of\
the larder when I lived with papa and mama, and I use the word almost\
unconsciously. What I mean to express is, that there is nothing to eat\
in the house.\'92\
\
\'91Dear me!\'92 I said, in great concern.\
\
I had two or three shillings of my week\'92s money in my pocket--from which\
I presume that it must have been on a Wednesday night when we held this\
conversation--and I hastily produced them, and with heartfelt emotion\
begged Mrs. Micawber to accept of them as a loan. But that lady, kissing\
me, and making me put them back in my pocket, replied that she couldn\'92t\
think of it.\
\
\'91No, my dear Master Copperfield,\'92 said she, \'91far be it from my thoughts!\
But you have a discretion beyond your years, and can render me another\
kind of service, if you will; and a service I will thankfully accept\
of.\'92\
\
I begged Mrs. Micawber to name it.\
\
\'91I have parted with the plate myself,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber. \'91Six tea, two\
salt, and a pair of sugars, I have at different times borrowed money on,\
in secret, with my own hands. But the twins are a great tie; and to me,\
with my recollections, of papa and mama, these transactions are very\
painful. There are still a few trifles that we could part with. Mr.\
Micawber\'92s feelings would never allow him to dispose of them; and\
Clickett\'92--this was the girl from the workhouse--\'91being of a vulgar\
mind, would take painful liberties if so much confidence was reposed in\
her. Master Copperfield, if I might ask you--\'92\
\
I understood Mrs. Micawber now, and begged her to make use of me to any\
extent. I began to dispose of the more portable articles of property\
that very evening; and went out on a similar expedition almost every\
morning, before I went to Murdstone and Grinby\'92s.\
\
Mr. Micawber had a few books on a little chiffonier, which he called the\
library; and those went first. I carried them, one after another, to\
a bookstall in the City Road--one part of which, near our house, was\
almost all bookstalls and bird shops then--and sold them for whatever\
they would bring. The keeper of this bookstall, who lived in a little\
house behind it, used to get tipsy every night, and to be violently\
scolded by his wife every morning. More than once, when I went there\
early, I had audience of him in a turn-up bedstead, with a cut in his\
forehead or a black eye, bearing witness to his excesses over-night (I\
am afraid he was quarrelsome in his drink), and he, with a shaking\
hand, endeavouring to find the needful shillings in one or other of the\
pockets of his clothes, which lay upon the floor, while his wife, with a\
baby in her arms and her shoes down at heel, never left off rating him.\
Sometimes he had lost his money, and then he would ask me to call again;\
but his wife had always got some--had taken his, I dare say, while he\
was drunk--and secretly completed the bargain on the stairs, as we went\
down together. At the pawnbroker\'92s shop, too, I began to be very well\
known. The principal gentleman who officiated behind the counter, took\
a good deal of notice of me; and often got me, I recollect, to decline a\
Latin noun or adjective, or to conjugate a Latin verb, in his ear, while\
he transacted my business. After all these occasions Mrs. Micawber made\
a little treat, which was generally a supper; and there was a peculiar\
relish in these meals which I well remember.\
\
At last Mr. Micawber\'92s difficulties came to a crisis, and he was\
arrested early one morning, and carried over to the King\'92s Bench Prison\
in the Borough. He told me, as he went out of the house, that the God\
of day had now gone down upon him--and I really thought his heart was\
broken and mine too. But I heard, afterwards, that he was seen to play a\
lively game at skittles, before noon.\
\
On the first Sunday after he was taken there, I was to go and see him,\
and have dinner with him. I was to ask my way to such a place, and just\
short of that place I should see such another place, and just short of\
that I should see a yard, which I was to cross, and keep straight on\
until I saw a turnkey. All this I did; and when at last I did see a\
turnkey (poor little fellow that I was!), and thought how, when Roderick\
Random was in a debtors\'92 prison, there was a man there with nothing\
on him but an old rug, the turnkey swam before my dimmed eyes and my\
beating heart.\
\
Mr. Micawber was waiting for me within the gate, and we went up to his\
room (top story but one), and cried very much. He solemnly conjured me,\
I remember, to take warning by his fate; and to observe that if a man\
had twenty pounds a-year for his income, and spent nineteen pounds\
nineteen shillings and sixpence, he would be happy, but that if he\
spent twenty pounds one he would be miserable. After which he borrowed a\
shilling of me for porter, gave me a written order on Mrs. Micawber for\
the amount, and put away his pocket-handkerchief, and cheered up.\
\
We sat before a little fire, with two bricks put within the rusted\
grate, one on each side, to prevent its burning too many coals; until\
another debtor, who shared the room with Mr. Micawber, came in from the\
bakehouse with the loin of mutton which was our joint-stock repast.\
Then I was sent up to \'91Captain Hopkins\'92 in the room overhead, with Mr.\
Micawber\'92s compliments, and I was his young friend, and would Captain\
Hopkins lend me a knife and fork.\
\
Captain Hopkins lent me the knife and fork, with his compliments to Mr.\
Micawber. There was a very dirty lady in his little room, and two wan\
girls, his daughters, with shock heads of hair. I thought it was better\
to borrow Captain Hopkins\'92s knife and fork, than Captain Hopkins\'92s comb.\
The Captain himself was in the last extremity of shabbiness, with large\
whiskers, and an old, old brown great-coat with no other coat below it.\
I saw his bed rolled up in a corner; and what plates and dishes and pots\
he had, on a shelf; and I divined (God knows how) that though the two\
girls with the shock heads of hair were Captain Hopkins\'92s children, the\
dirty lady was not married to Captain Hopkins. My timid station on his\
threshold was not occupied more than a couple of minutes at most; but\
I came down again with all this in my knowledge, as surely as the knife\
and fork were in my hand.\
\
There was something gipsy-like and agreeable in the dinner, after all.\
I took back Captain Hopkins\'92s knife and fork early in the afternoon,\
and went home to comfort Mrs. Micawber with an account of my visit.\
She fainted when she saw me return, and made a little jug of egg-hot\
afterwards to console us while we talked it over.\
\
I don\'92t know how the household furniture came to be sold for the family\
benefit, or who sold it, except that I did not. Sold it was, however,\
and carried away in a van; except the bed, a few chairs, and the kitchen\
table. With these possessions we encamped, as it were, in the two\
parlours of the emptied house in Windsor Terrace; Mrs. Micawber, the\
children, the Orfling, and myself; and lived in those rooms night and\
day. I have no idea for how long, though it seems to me for a long\
time. At last Mrs. Micawber resolved to move into the prison, where Mr.\
Micawber had now secured a room to himself. So I took the key of the\
house to the landlord, who was very glad to get it; and the beds were\
sent over to the King\'92s Bench, except mine, for which a little room was\
hired outside the walls in the neighbourhood of that Institution, very\
much to my satisfaction, since the Micawbers and I had become too used\
to one another, in our troubles, to part. The Orfling was likewise\
accommodated with an inexpensive lodging in the same neighbourhood.\
Mine was a quiet back-garret with a sloping roof, commanding a pleasant\
prospect of a timberyard; and when I took possession of it, with the\
reflection that Mr. Micawber\'92s troubles had come to a crisis at last, I\
thought it quite a paradise.\
\
All this time I was working at Murdstone and Grinby\'92s in the same common\
way, and with the same common companions, and with the same sense of\
unmerited degradation as at first. But I never, happily for me no doubt,\
made a single acquaintance, or spoke to any of the many boys whom I\
saw daily in going to the warehouse, in coming from it, and in prowling\
about the streets at meal-times. I led the same secretly unhappy life;\
but I led it in the same lonely, self-reliant manner. The only changes\
I am conscious of are, firstly, that I had grown more shabby, and\
secondly, that I was now relieved of much of the weight of Mr. and Mrs.\
Micawber\'92s cares; for some relatives or friends had engaged to help them\
at their present pass, and they lived more comfortably in the prison\
than they had lived for a long while out of it. I used to breakfast with\
them now, in virtue of some arrangement, of which I have forgotten\
the details. I forget, too, at what hour the gates were opened in the\
morning, admitting of my going in; but I know that I was often up at six\
o\'92clock, and that my favourite lounging-place in the interval was old\
London Bridge, where I was wont to sit in one of the stone recesses,\
watching the people going by, or to look over the balustrades at the sun\
shining in the water, and lighting up the golden flame on the top of the\
Monument. The Orfling met me here sometimes, to be told some astonishing\
fictions respecting the wharves and the Tower; of which I can say no\
more than that I hope I believed them myself. In the evening I used\
to go back to the prison, and walk up and down the parade with Mr.\
Micawber; or play casino with Mrs. Micawber, and hear reminiscences of\
her papa and mama. Whether Mr. Murdstone knew where I was, I am unable\
to say. I never told them at Murdstone and Grinby\'92s.\
\
Mr. Micawber\'92s affairs, although past their crisis, were very much\
involved by reason of a certain \'91Deed\'92, of which I used to hear a great\
deal, and which I suppose, now, to have been some former composition\
with his creditors, though I was so far from being clear about it\
then, that I am conscious of having confounded it with those demoniacal\
parchments which are held to have, once upon a time, obtained to a great\
extent in Germany. At last this document appeared to be got out of the\
way, somehow; at all events it ceased to be the rock-ahead it had been;\
and Mrs. Micawber informed me that \'91her family\'92 had decided that Mr.\
Micawber should apply for his release under the Insolvent Debtors Act,\
which would set him free, she expected, in about six weeks.\
\
\'91And then,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, who was present, \'91I have no doubt I\
shall, please Heaven, begin to be beforehand with the world, and to live\
in a perfectly new manner, if--in short, if anything turns up.\'92\
\
By way of going in for anything that might be on the cards, I call to\
mind that Mr. Micawber, about this time, composed a petition to the\
House of Commons, praying for an alteration in the law of imprisonment\
for debt. I set down this remembrance here, because it is an instance to\
myself of the manner in which I fitted my old books to my altered life,\
and made stories for myself, out of the streets, and out of men and\
women; and how some main points in the character I shall unconsciously\
develop, I suppose, in writing my life, were gradually forming all this\
while.\
\
There was a club in the prison, in which Mr. Micawber, as a gentleman,\
was a great authority. Mr. Micawber had stated his idea of this petition\
to the club, and the club had strongly approved of the same. Wherefore\
Mr. Micawber (who was a thoroughly good-natured man, and as active a\
creature about everything but his own affairs as ever existed, and never\
so happy as when he was busy about something that could never be of any\
profit to him) set to work at the petition, invented it, engrossed it\
on an immense sheet of paper, spread it out on a table, and appointed a\
time for all the club, and all within the walls if they chose, to come\
up to his room and sign it.\
\
When I heard of this approaching ceremony, I was so anxious to see them\
all come in, one after another, though I knew the greater part of\
them already, and they me, that I got an hour\'92s leave of absence from\
Murdstone and Grinby\'92s, and established myself in a corner for that\
purpose. As many of the principal members of the club as could be got\
into the small room without filling it, supported Mr. Micawber in front\
of the petition, while my old friend Captain Hopkins (who had washed\
himself, to do honour to so solemn an occasion) stationed himself close\
to it, to read it to all who were unacquainted with its contents. The\
door was then thrown open, and the general population began to come in,\
in a long file: several waiting outside, while one entered, affixed his\
signature, and went out. To everybody in succession, Captain Hopkins\
said: \'91Have you read it?\'92--\'91No.\'92---\'91Would you like to hear it read?\'92 If\
he weakly showed the least disposition to hear it, Captain Hopkins, in\
a loud sonorous voice, gave him every word of it. The Captain would\
have read it twenty thousand times, if twenty thousand people would have\
heard him, one by one. I remember a certain luscious roll he gave to\
such phrases as \'91The people\'92s representatives in Parliament assembled,\'92\
\'91Your petitioners therefore humbly approach your honourable house,\'92 \'91His\
gracious Majesty\'92s unfortunate subjects,\'92 as if the words were something\
real in his mouth, and delicious to taste; Mr. Micawber, meanwhile,\
listening with a little of an author\'92s vanity, and contemplating (not\
severely) the spikes on the opposite wall.\
\
As I walked to and fro daily between Southwark and Blackfriars, and\
lounged about at meal-times in obscure streets, the stones of which\
may, for anything I know, be worn at this moment by my childish feet, I\
wonder how many of these people were wanting in the crowd that used to\
come filing before me in review again, to the echo of Captain Hopkins\'92s\
voice! When my thoughts go back, now, to that slow agony of my youth, I\
wonder how much of the histories I invented for such people hangs like a\
mist of fancy over well-remembered facts! When I tread the old ground,\
I do not wonder that I seem to see and pity, going on before me, an\
innocent romantic boy, making his imaginative world out of such strange\
experiences and sordid things!\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 12. LIKING LIFE ON MY OWN ACCOUNT NO BETTER, I FORM A GREAT RESOLUTION\
\
\
In due time, Mr. Micawber\'92s petition was ripe for hearing; and that\
gentleman was ordered to be discharged under the Act, to my great joy.\
His creditors were not implacable; and Mrs. Micawber informed me that\
even the revengeful boot-maker had declared in open court that he bore\
him no malice, but that when money was owing to him he liked to be paid.\
He said he thought it was human nature.\
\
Mr. Micawber returned to the King\'92s Bench when his case was over, as\
some fees were to be settled, and some formalities observed, before he\
could be actually released. The club received him with transport, and\
held an harmonic meeting that evening in his honour; while Mrs. Micawber\
and I had a lamb\'92s fry in private, surrounded by the sleeping family.\
\
\'91On such an occasion I will give you, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Mrs.\
Micawber, \'91in a little more flip,\'92 for we had been having some already,\
\'91the memory of my papa and mama.\'92\
\
\'91Are they dead, ma\'92am?\'92 I inquired, after drinking the toast in a\
wine-glass.\
\
\'91My mama departed this life,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, \'91before Mr. Micawber\'92s\
difficulties commenced, or at least before they became pressing. My papa\
lived to bail Mr. Micawber several times, and then expired, regretted by\
a numerous circle.\'92\
\
Mrs. Micawber shook her head, and dropped a pious tear upon the twin who\
happened to be in hand.\
\
As I could hardly hope for a more favourable opportunity of putting a\
question in which I had a near interest, I said to Mrs. Micawber:\
\
\'91May I ask, ma\'92am, what you and Mr. Micawber intend to do, now that Mr.\
Micawber is out of his difficulties, and at liberty? Have you settled\
yet?\'92\
\
\'91My family,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, who always said those two words with an\
air, though I never could discover who came under the denomination, \'91my\
family are of opinion that Mr. Micawber should quit London, and exert\
his talents in the country. Mr. Micawber is a man of great talent,\
Master Copperfield.\'92\
\
I said I was sure of that.\
\
\'91Of great talent,\'92 repeated Mrs. Micawber. \'91My family are of opinion,\
that, with a little interest, something might be done for a man of his\
ability in the Custom House. The influence of my family being local, it\
is their wish that Mr. Micawber should go down to Plymouth. They think\
it indispensable that he should be upon the spot.\'92\
\
\'91That he may be ready?\'92 I suggested.\
\
\'91Exactly,\'92 returned Mrs. Micawber. \'91That he may be ready--in case of\
anything turning up.\'92\
\
\'91And do you go too, ma\'92am?\'92\
\
The events of the day, in combination with the twins, if not with the\
flip, had made Mrs. Micawber hysterical, and she shed tears as she\
replied:\
\
\'91I never will desert Mr. Micawber. Mr. Micawber may have concealed his\
difficulties from me in the first instance, but his sanguine temper may\
have led him to expect that he would overcome them. The pearl necklace\
and bracelets which I inherited from mama, have been disposed of for\
less than half their value; and the set of coral, which was the wedding\
gift of my papa, has been actually thrown away for nothing. But I never\
will desert Mr. Micawber. No!\'92 cried Mrs. Micawber, more affected than\
before, \'91I never will do it! It\'92s of no use asking me!\'92\
\
I felt quite uncomfortable--as if Mrs. Micawber supposed I had asked her\
to do anything of the sort!--and sat looking at her in alarm.\
\
\'91Mr. Micawber has his faults. I do not deny that he is improvident. I\
do not deny that he has kept me in the dark as to his resources and his\
liabilities both,\'92 she went on, looking at the wall; \'91but I never will\
desert Mr. Micawber!\'92\
\
Mrs. Micawber having now raised her voice into a perfect scream, I\
was so frightened that I ran off to the club-room, and disturbed Mr.\
Micawber in the act of presiding at a long table, and leading the chorus\
of\
\
     Gee up, Dobbin,\
     Gee ho, Dobbin,\
     Gee up, Dobbin,\
     Gee up, and gee ho--o--o!\
\
with the tidings that Mrs. Micawber was in an alarming state, upon\
which he immediately burst into tears, and came away with me with his\
waistcoat full of the heads and tails of shrimps, of which he had been\
partaking.\
\
\'91Emma, my angel!\'92 cried Mr. Micawber, running into the room; \'91what is\
the matter?\'92\
\
\'91I never will desert you, Micawber!\'92 she exclaimed.\
\
\'91My life!\'92 said Mr. Micawber, taking her in his arms. \'91I am perfectly\
aware of it.\'92\
\
\'91He is the parent of my children! He is the father of my twins! He is\
the husband of my affections,\'92 cried Mrs. Micawber, struggling; \'91and I\
ne--ver--will--desert Mr. Micawber!\'92\
\
Mr. Micawber was so deeply affected by this proof of her devotion (as\
to me, I was dissolved in tears), that he hung over her in a passionate\
manner, imploring her to look up, and to be calm. But the more he asked\
Mrs. Micawber to look up, the more she fixed her eyes on nothing;\
and the more he asked her to compose herself, the more she wouldn\'92t.\
Consequently Mr. Micawber was soon so overcome, that he mingled his\
tears with hers and mine; until he begged me to do him the favour of\
taking a chair on the staircase, while he got her into bed. I would have\
taken my leave for the night, but he would not hear of my doing that\
until the strangers\'92 bell should ring. So I sat at the staircase window,\
until he came out with another chair and joined me.\
\
\'91How is Mrs. Micawber now, sir?\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Very low,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, shaking his head; \'91reaction. Ah, this has\
been a dreadful day! We stand alone now--everything is gone from us!\'92\
\
Mr. Micawber pressed my hand, and groaned, and afterwards shed tears.\
I was greatly touched, and disappointed too, for I had expected that we\
should be quite gay on this happy and long-looked-for occasion. But Mr.\
and Mrs. Micawber were so used to their old difficulties, I think, that\
they felt quite shipwrecked when they came to consider that they were\
released from them. All their elasticity was departed, and I never saw\
them half so wretched as on this night; insomuch that when the bell\
rang, and Mr. Micawber walked with me to the lodge, and parted from me\
there with a blessing, I felt quite afraid to leave him by himself, he\
was so profoundly miserable.\
\
But through all the confusion and lowness of spirits in which we had\
been, so unexpectedly to me, involved, I plainly discerned that Mr. and\
Mrs. Micawber and their family were going away from London, and that a\
parting between us was near at hand. It was in my walk home that night,\
and in the sleepless hours which followed when I lay in bed, that the\
thought first occurred to me--though I don\'92t know how it came into my\
head--which afterwards shaped itself into a settled resolution.\
\
I had grown to be so accustomed to the Micawbers, and had been so\
intimate with them in their distresses, and was so utterly friendless\
without them, that the prospect of being thrown upon some new shift for\
a lodging, and going once more among unknown people, was like being that\
moment turned adrift into my present life, with such a knowledge of it\
ready made as experience had given me. All the sensitive feelings it\
wounded so cruelly, all the shame and misery it kept alive within my\
breast, became more poignant as I thought of this; and I determined that\
the life was unendurable.\
\
That there was no hope of escape from it, unless the escape was my own\
act, I knew quite well. I rarely heard from Miss Murdstone, and never\
from Mr. Murdstone: but two or three parcels of made or mended clothes\
had come up for me, consigned to Mr. Quinion, and in each there was\
a scrap of paper to the effect that J. M. trusted D. C. was applying\
himself to business, and devoting himself wholly to his duties--not the\
least hint of my ever being anything else than the common drudge into\
which I was fast settling down.\
\
The very next day showed me, while my mind was in the first agitation of\
what it had conceived, that Mrs. Micawber had not spoken of their going\
away without warrant. They took a lodging in the house where I lived,\
for a week; at the expiration of which time they were to start for\
Plymouth. Mr. Micawber himself came down to the counting-house, in the\
afternoon, to tell Mr. Quinion that he must relinquish me on the day\
of his departure, and to give me a high character, which I am sure I\
deserved. And Mr. Quinion, calling in Tipp the carman, who was a married\
man, and had a room to let, quartered me prospectively on him--by our\
mutual consent, as he had every reason to think; for I said nothing,\
though my resolution was now taken.\
\
I passed my evenings with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, during the remaining\
term of our residence under the same roof; and I think we became fonder\
of one another as the time went on. On the last Sunday, they invited me\
to dinner; and we had a loin of pork and apple sauce, and a pudding. I\
had bought a spotted wooden horse over-night as a parting gift to little\
Wilkins Micawber--that was the boy--and a doll for little Emma. I had\
also bestowed a shilling on the Orfling, who was about to be disbanded.\
\
We had a very pleasant day, though we were all in a tender state about\
our approaching separation.\
\
\'91I shall never, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, \'91revert to the\
period when Mr. Micawber was in difficulties, without thinking of\
you. Your conduct has always been of the most delicate and obliging\
description. You have never been a lodger. You have been a friend.\'92\
\
\'91My dear,\'92 said Mr. Micawber; \'91Copperfield,\'92 for so he had been\
accustomed to call me, of late, \'91has a heart to feel for the distresses\
of his fellow-creatures when they are behind a cloud, and a head to\
plan, and a hand to--in short, a general ability to dispose of such\
available property as could be made away with.\'92\
\
I expressed my sense of this commendation, and said I was very sorry we\
were going to lose one another.\
\
\'91My dear young friend,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91I am older than you; a man\
of some experience in life, and--and of some experience, in short, in\
difficulties, generally speaking. At present, and until something turns\
up (which I am, I may say, hourly expecting), I have nothing to bestow\
but advice. Still my advice is so far worth taking, that--in short, that\
I have never taken it myself, and am the\'92--here Mr. Micawber, who had\
been beaming and smiling, all over his head and face, up to the present\
moment, checked himself and frowned--\'91the miserable wretch you behold.\'92\
\
\'91My dear Micawber!\'92 urged his wife.\
\
\'91I say,\'92 returned Mr. Micawber, quite forgetting himself, and smiling\
again, \'91the miserable wretch you behold. My advice is, never do tomorrow\
what you can do today. Procrastination is the thief of time. Collar\
him!\'92\
\
\'91My poor papa\'92s maxim,\'92 Mrs. Micawber observed.\
\
\'91My dear,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91your papa was very well in his way, and\
Heaven forbid that I should disparage him. Take him for all in all, we\
ne\'92er shall--in short, make the acquaintance, probably, of anybody else\
possessing, at his time of life, the same legs for gaiters, and able to\
read the same description of print, without spectacles. But he applied\
that maxim to our marriage, my dear; and that was so far prematurely\
entered into, in consequence, that I never recovered the expense.\'92 Mr.\
Micawber looked aside at Mrs. Micawber, and added: \'91Not that I am sorry\
for it. Quite the contrary, my love.\'92 After which, he was grave for a\
minute or so.\
\
\'91My other piece of advice, Copperfield,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91you know.\
Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen nineteen and\
six, result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure\
twenty pounds ought and six, result misery. The blossom is blighted,\
the leaf is withered, the god of day goes down upon the dreary scene,\
and--and in short you are for ever floored. As I am!\'92\
\
To make his example the more impressive, Mr. Micawber drank a glass of\
punch with an air of great enjoyment and satisfaction, and whistled the\
College Hornpipe.\
\
I did not fail to assure him that I would store these precepts in my\
mind, though indeed I had no need to do so, for, at the time, they\
affected me visibly. Next morning I met the whole family at the coach\
office, and saw them, with a desolate heart, take their places outside,\
at the back.\
\
\'91Master Copperfield,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, \'91God bless you! I never can\
forget all that, you know, and I never would if I could.\'92\
\
\'91Copperfield,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91farewell! Every happiness and\
prosperity! If, in the progress of revolving years, I could persuade\
myself that my blighted destiny had been a warning to you, I should feel\
that I had not occupied another man\'92s place in existence altogether in\
vain. In case of anything turning up (of which I am rather confident),\
I shall be extremely happy if it should be in my power to improve your\
prospects.\'92\
\
I think, as Mrs. Micawber sat at the back of the coach, with the\
children, and I stood in the road looking wistfully at them, a mist\
cleared from her eyes, and she saw what a little creature I really was.\
I think so, because she beckoned to me to climb up, with quite a new and\
motherly expression in her face, and put her arm round my neck, and gave\
me just such a kiss as she might have given to her own boy. I had barely\
time to get down again before the coach started, and I could hardly see\
the family for the handkerchiefs they waved. It was gone in a minute.\
The Orfling and I stood looking vacantly at each other in the middle\
of the road, and then shook hands and said good-bye; she going back,\
I suppose, to St. Luke\'92s workhouse, as I went to begin my weary day at\
Murdstone and Grinby\'92s.\
\
But with no intention of passing many more weary days there. No. I had\
resolved to run away.---To go, by some means or other, down into the\
country, to the only relation I had in the world, and tell my story to\
my aunt, Miss Betsey. I have already observed that I don\'92t know how this\
desperate idea came into my brain. But, once there, it remained there;\
and hardened into a purpose than which I have never entertained a more\
determined purpose in my life. I am far from sure that I believed there\
was anything hopeful in it, but my mind was thoroughly made up that it\
must be carried into execution.\
\
Again, and again, and a hundred times again, since the night when the\
thought had first occurred to me and banished sleep, I had gone over\
that old story of my poor mother\'92s about my birth, which it had been one\
of my great delights in the old time to hear her tell, and which I knew\
by heart. My aunt walked into that story, and walked out of it, a dread\
and awful personage; but there was one little trait in her behaviour\
which I liked to dwell on, and which gave me some faint shadow of\
encouragement. I could not forget how my mother had thought that she\
felt her touch her pretty hair with no ungentle hand; and though it\
might have been altogether my mother\'92s fancy, and might have had no\
foundation whatever in fact, I made a little picture, out of it, of my\
terrible aunt relenting towards the girlish beauty that I recollected so\
well and loved so much, which softened the whole narrative. It is very\
possible that it had been in my mind a long time, and had gradually\
engendered my determination.\
\
As I did not even know where Miss Betsey lived, I wrote a long letter\
to Peggotty, and asked her, incidentally, if she remembered; pretending\
that I had heard of such a lady living at a certain place I named at\
random, and had a curiosity to know if it were the same. In the course\
of that letter, I told Peggotty that I had a particular occasion for\
half a guinea; and that if she could lend me that sum until I could\
repay it, I should be very much obliged to her, and would tell her\
afterwards what I had wanted it for.\
\
Peggotty\'92s answer soon arrived, and was, as usual, full of affectionate\
devotion. She enclosed the half guinea (I was afraid she must have had\
a world of trouble to get it out of Mr. Barkis\'92s box), and told me that\
Miss Betsey lived near Dover, but whether at Dover itself, at Hythe,\
Sandgate, or Folkestone, she could not say. One of our men, however,\
informing me on my asking him about these places, that they were all\
close together, I deemed this enough for my object, and resolved to set\
out at the end of that week.\
\
Being a very honest little creature, and unwilling to disgrace the\
memory I was going to leave behind me at Murdstone and Grinby\'92s, I\
considered myself bound to remain until Saturday night; and, as I had\
been paid a week\'92s wages in advance when I first came there, not to\
present myself in the counting-house at the usual hour, to receive my\
stipend. For this express reason, I had borrowed the half-guinea, that\
I might not be without a fund for my travelling-expenses. Accordingly,\
when the Saturday night came, and we were all waiting in the warehouse\
to be paid, and Tipp the carman, who always took precedence, went in\
first to draw his money, I shook Mick Walker by the hand; asked him,\
when it came to his turn to be paid, to say to Mr. Quinion that I had\
gone to move my box to Tipp\'92s; and, bidding a last good night to Mealy\
Potatoes, ran away.\
\
My box was at my old lodging, over the water, and I had written a\
direction for it on the back of one of our address cards that we nailed\
on the casks: \'91Master David, to be left till called for, at the Coach\
Office, Dover.\'92 This I had in my pocket ready to put on the box, after I\
should have got it out of the house; and as I went towards my lodging,\
I looked about me for someone who would help me to carry it to the\
booking-office.\
\
There was a long-legged young man with a very little empty donkey-cart,\
standing near the Obelisk, in the Blackfriars Road, whose eye I caught\
as I was going by, and who, addressing me as \'91Sixpenn\'92orth of bad\
ha\'92pence,\'92 hoped \'91I should know him agin to swear to\'92--in allusion, I\
have no doubt, to my staring at him. I stopped to assure him that I had\
not done so in bad manners, but uncertain whether he might or might not\
like a job.\
\
\'91Wot job?\'92 said the long-legged young man.\
\
\'91To move a box,\'92 I answered.\
\
\'91Wot box?\'92 said the long-legged young man.\
\
I told him mine, which was down that street there, and which I wanted\
him to take to the Dover coach office for sixpence.\
\
\'91Done with you for a tanner!\'92 said the long-legged young man, and\
directly got upon his cart, which was nothing but a large wooden tray on\
wheels, and rattled away at such a rate, that it was as much as I could\
do to keep pace with the donkey.\
\
There was a defiant manner about this young man, and particularly about\
the way in which he chewed straw as he spoke to me, that I did not much\
like; as the bargain was made, however, I took him upstairs to the room\
I was leaving, and we brought the box down, and put it on his cart.\
Now, I was unwilling to put the direction-card on there, lest any of my\
landlord\'92s family should fathom what I was doing, and detain me; so\
I said to the young man that I would be glad if he would stop for a\
minute, when he came to the dead-wall of the King\'92s Bench prison. The\
words were no sooner out of my mouth, than he rattled away as if he, my\
box, the cart, and the donkey, were all equally mad; and I was quite out\
of breath with running and calling after him, when I caught him at the\
place appointed.\
\
Being much flushed and excited, I tumbled my half-guinea out of my\
pocket in pulling the card out. I put it in my mouth for safety, and\
though my hands trembled a good deal, had just tied the card on very\
much to my satisfaction, when I felt myself violently chucked under the\
chin by the long-legged young man, and saw my half-guinea fly out of my\
mouth into his hand.\
\
\'91Wot!\'92 said the young man, seizing me by my jacket collar, with a\
frightful grin. \'91This is a pollis case, is it? You\'92re a-going to bolt,\
are you? Come to the pollis, you young warmin, come to the pollis!\'92\
\
\'91You give me my money back, if you please,\'92 said I, very much\
frightened; \'91and leave me alone.\'92\
\
\'91Come to the pollis!\'92 said the young man. \'91You shall prove it yourn to\
the pollis.\'92\
\
\'91Give me my box and money, will you,\'92 I cried, bursting into tears.\
\
The young man still replied: \'91Come to the pollis!\'92 and was dragging me\
against the donkey in a violent manner, as if there were any affinity\
between that animal and a magistrate, when he changed his mind, jumped\
into the cart, sat upon my box, and, exclaiming that he would drive to\
the pollis straight, rattled away harder than ever.\
\
I ran after him as fast as I could, but I had no breath to call out\
with, and should not have dared to call out, now, if I had. I narrowly\
escaped being run over, twenty times at least, in half a mile. Now I\
lost him, now I saw him, now I lost him, now I was cut at with a whip,\
now shouted at, now down in the mud, now up again, now running into\
somebody\'92s arms, now running headlong at a post. At length, confused by\
fright and heat, and doubting whether half London might not by this time\
be turning out for my apprehension, I left the young man to go where\
he would with my box and money; and, panting and crying, but never\
stopping, faced about for Greenwich, which I had understood was on\
the Dover Road: taking very little more out of the world, towards the\
retreat of my aunt, Miss Betsey, than I had brought into it, on the\
night when my arrival gave her so much umbrage.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 13. THE SEQUEL OF MY RESOLUTION\
\
\
For anything I know, I may have had some wild idea of running all the\
way to Dover, when I gave up the pursuit of the young man with the\
donkey-cart, and started for Greenwich. My scattered senses were soon\
collected as to that point, if I had; for I came to a stop in the Kent\
Road, at a terrace with a piece of water before it, and a great foolish\
image in the middle, blowing a dry shell. Here I sat down on a doorstep,\
quite spent and exhausted with the efforts I had already made, and with\
hardly breath enough to cry for the loss of my box and half-guinea.\
\
It was by this time dark; I heard the clocks strike ten, as I sat\
resting. But it was a summer night, fortunately, and fine weather. When\
I had recovered my breath, and had got rid of a stifling sensation in\
my throat, I rose up and went on. In the midst of my distress, I had no\
notion of going back. I doubt if I should have had any, though there had\
been a Swiss snow-drift in the Kent Road.\
\
But my standing possessed of only three-halfpence in the world (and I\
am sure I wonder how they came to be left in my pocket on a Saturday\
night!) troubled me none the less because I went on. I began to picture\
to myself, as a scrap of newspaper intelligence, my being found dead in\
a day or two, under some hedge; and I trudged on miserably, though as\
fast as I could, until I happened to pass a little shop, where it was\
written up that ladies\'92 and gentlemen\'92s wardrobes were bought, and that\
the best price was given for rags, bones, and kitchen-stuff. The master\
of this shop was sitting at the door in his shirt-sleeves, smoking; and\
as there were a great many coats and pairs of trousers dangling from\
the low ceiling, and only two feeble candles burning inside to show\
what they were, I fancied that he looked like a man of a revengeful\
disposition, who had hung all his enemies, and was enjoying himself.\
\
My late experiences with Mr. and Mrs. Micawber suggested to me that here\
might be a means of keeping off the wolf for a little while. I went up\
the next by-street, took off my waistcoat, rolled it neatly under my\
arm, and came back to the shop door.\
\
\'91If you please, sir,\'92 I said, \'91I am to sell this for a fair price.\'92\
\
Mr. Dolloby--Dolloby was the name over the shop door, at least--took the\
waistcoat, stood his pipe on its head, against the door-post, went into\
the shop, followed by me, snuffed the two candles with his fingers,\
spread the waistcoat on the counter, and looked at it there, held it up\
against the light, and looked at it there, and ultimately said:\
\
\'91What do you call a price, now, for this here little weskit?\'92\
\
\'91Oh! you know best, sir,\'92 I returned modestly.\
\
\'91I can\'92t be buyer and seller too,\'92 said Mr. Dolloby. \'91Put a price on\
this here little weskit.\'92\
\
\'91Would eighteenpence be?\'92--I hinted, after some hesitation.\
\
Mr. Dolloby rolled it up again, and gave it me back. \'91I should rob my\
family,\'92 he said, \'91if I was to offer ninepence for it.\'92\
\
This was a disagreeable way of putting the business; because it imposed\
upon me, a perfect stranger, the unpleasantness of asking Mr. Dolloby to\
rob his family on my account. My circumstances being so very pressing,\
however, I said I would take ninepence for it, if he pleased. Mr.\
Dolloby, not without some grumbling, gave ninepence. I wished him good\
night, and walked out of the shop the richer by that sum, and the\
poorer by a waistcoat. But when I buttoned my jacket, that was not much.\
Indeed, I foresaw pretty clearly that my jacket would go next, and that\
I should have to make the best of my way to Dover in a shirt and a pair\
of trousers, and might deem myself lucky if I got there even in that\
trim. But my mind did not run so much on this as might be supposed.\
Beyond a general impression of the distance before me, and of the young\
man with the donkey-cart having used me cruelly, I think I had no\
very urgent sense of my difficulties when I once again set off with my\
ninepence in my pocket.\
\
A plan had occurred to me for passing the night, which I was going to\
carry into execution. This was, to lie behind the wall at the back of my\
old school, in a corner where there used to be a haystack. I imagined\
it would be a kind of company to have the boys, and the bedroom where\
I used to tell the stories, so near me: although the boys would know\
nothing of my being there, and the bedroom would yield me no shelter.\
\
I had had a hard day\'92s work, and was pretty well jaded when I came\
climbing out, at last, upon the level of Blackheath. It cost me some\
trouble to find out Salem House; but I found it, and I found a haystack\
in the corner, and I lay down by it; having first walked round the wall,\
and looked up at the windows, and seen that all was dark and silent\
within. Never shall I forget the lonely sensation of first lying down,\
without a roof above my head!\
\
Sleep came upon me as it came on many other outcasts, against whom\
house-doors were locked, and house-dogs barked, that night--and I\
dreamed of lying on my old school-bed, talking to the boys in my room;\
and found myself sitting upright, with Steerforth\'92s name upon my lips,\
looking wildly at the stars that were glistening and glimmering above\
me. When I remembered where I was at that untimely hour, a feeling\
stole upon me that made me get up, afraid of I don\'92t know what, and walk\
about. But the fainter glimmering of the stars, and the pale light in\
the sky where the day was coming, reassured me: and my eyes being very\
heavy, I lay down again and slept--though with a knowledge in my sleep\
that it was cold--until the warm beams of the sun, and the ringing of\
the getting-up bell at Salem House, awoke me. If I could have hoped that\
Steerforth was there, I would have lurked about until he came out\
alone; but I knew he must have left long since. Traddles still remained,\
perhaps, but it was very doubtful; and I had not sufficient confidence\
in his discretion or good luck, however strong my reliance was on his\
good nature, to wish to trust him with my situation. So I crept away\
from the wall as Mr. Creakle\'92s boys were getting up, and struck into the\
long dusty track which I had first known to be the Dover Road when I was\
one of them, and when I little expected that any eyes would ever see me\
the wayfarer I was now, upon it.\
\
What a different Sunday morning from the old Sunday morning at Yarmouth!\
In due time I heard the church-bells ringing, as I plodded on; and I met\
people who were going to church; and I passed a church or two where the\
congregation were inside, and the sound of singing came out into the\
sunshine, while the beadle sat and cooled himself in the shade of the\
porch, or stood beneath the yew-tree, with his hand to his forehead,\
glowering at me going by. But the peace and rest of the old Sunday\
morning were on everything, except me. That was the difference. I felt\
quite wicked in my dirt and dust, with my tangled hair. But for the\
quiet picture I had conjured up, of my mother in her youth and beauty,\
weeping by the fire, and my aunt relenting to her, I hardly think I\
should have had the courage to go on until next day. But it always went\
before me, and I followed.\
\
I got, that Sunday, through three-and-twenty miles on the straight\
road, though not very easily, for I was new to that kind of toil. I\
see myself, as evening closes in, coming over the bridge at Rochester,\
footsore and tired, and eating bread that I had bought for supper.\
One or two little houses, with the notice, \'91Lodgings for Travellers\'92,\
hanging out, had tempted me; but I was afraid of spending the few pence\
I had, and was even more afraid of the vicious looks of the trampers I\
had met or overtaken. I sought no shelter, therefore, but the sky; and\
toiling into Chatham,--which, in that night\'92s aspect, is a mere dream of\
chalk, and drawbridges, and mastless ships in a muddy river, roofed\
like Noah\'92s arks,--crept, at last, upon a sort of grass-grown battery\
overhanging a lane, where a sentry was walking to and fro. Here I\
lay down, near a cannon; and, happy in the society of the sentry\'92s\
footsteps, though he knew no more of my being above him than the boys\
at Salem House had known of my lying by the wall, slept soundly until\
morning.\
\
Very stiff and sore of foot I was in the morning, and quite dazed by the\
beating of drums and marching of troops, which seemed to hem me in on\
every side when I went down towards the long narrow street. Feeling\
that I could go but a very little way that day, if I were to reserve any\
strength for getting to my journey\'92s end, I resolved to make the sale\
of my jacket its principal business. Accordingly, I took the jacket off,\
that I might learn to do without it; and carrying it under my arm, began\
a tour of inspection of the various slop-shops.\
\
It was a likely place to sell a jacket in; for the dealers in\
second-hand clothes were numerous, and were, generally speaking, on the\
look-out for customers at their shop doors. But as most of them had,\
hanging up among their stock, an officer\'92s coat or two, epaulettes and\
all, I was rendered timid by the costly nature of their dealings, and\
walked about for a long time without offering my merchandise to anyone.\
\
This modesty of mine directed my attention to the marine-store shops,\
and such shops as Mr. Dolloby\'92s, in preference to the regular dealers.\
At last I found one that I thought looked promising, at the corner of a\
dirty lane, ending in an enclosure full of stinging-nettles, against the\
palings of which some second-hand sailors\'92 clothes, that seemed to have\
overflowed the shop, were fluttering among some cots, and rusty guns,\
and oilskin hats, and certain trays full of so many old rusty keys of so\
many sizes that they seemed various enough to open all the doors in the\
world.\
\
Into this shop, which was low and small, and which was darkened\
rather than lighted by a little window, overhung with clothes, and was\
descended into by some steps, I went with a palpitating heart; which was\
not relieved when an ugly old man, with the lower part of his face all\
covered with a stubbly grey beard, rushed out of a dirty den behind it,\
and seized me by the hair of my head. He was a dreadful old man to look\
at, in a filthy flannel waistcoat, and smelling terribly of rum. His\
bedstead, covered with a tumbled and ragged piece of patchwork, was in\
the den he had come from, where another little window showed a prospect\
of more stinging-nettles, and a lame donkey.\
\
\'91Oh, what do you want?\'92 grinned this old man, in a fierce, monotonous\
whine. \'91Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do you want? Oh, my lungs and liver,\
what do you want? Oh, goroo, goroo!\'92\
\
I was so much dismayed by these words, and particularly by the\
repetition of the last unknown one, which was a kind of rattle in his\
throat, that I could make no answer; hereupon the old man, still holding\
me by the hair, repeated:\
\
\'91Oh, what do you want? Oh, my eyes and limbs, what do you want? Oh, my\
lungs and liver, what do you want? Oh, goroo!\'92--which he screwed out of\
himself, with an energy that made his eyes start in his head.\
\
\'91I wanted to know,\'92 I said, trembling, \'91if you would buy a jacket.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, let\'92s see the jacket!\'92 cried the old man. \'91Oh, my heart on fire,\
show the jacket to us! Oh, my eyes and limbs, bring the jacket out!\'92\
\
With that he took his trembling hands, which were like the claws of a\
great bird, out of my hair; and put on a pair of spectacles, not at all\
ornamental to his inflamed eyes.\
\
\'91Oh, how much for the jacket?\'92 cried the old man, after examining it.\
\'91Oh--goroo!--how much for the jacket?\'92\
\
\'91Half-a-crown,\'92 I answered, recovering myself.\
\
\'91Oh, my lungs and liver,\'92 cried the old man, \'91no! Oh, my eyes, no! Oh,\
my limbs, no! Eighteenpence. Goroo!\'92\
\
Every time he uttered this ejaculation, his eyes seemed to be in danger\
of starting out; and every sentence he spoke, he delivered in a sort\
of tune, always exactly the same, and more like a gust of wind, which\
begins low, mounts up high, and falls again, than any other comparison I\
can find for it.\
\
\'91Well,\'92 said I, glad to have closed the bargain, \'91I\'92ll take\
eighteenpence.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, my liver!\'92 cried the old man, throwing the jacket on a shelf. \'91Get\
out of the shop! Oh, my lungs, get out of the shop! Oh, my eyes and\
limbs--goroo!--don\'92t ask for money; make it an exchange.\'92 I never was\
so frightened in my life, before or since; but I told him humbly that\
I wanted money, and that nothing else was of any use to me, but that I\
would wait for it, as he desired, outside, and had no wish to hurry\
him. So I went outside, and sat down in the shade in a corner. And I sat\
there so many hours, that the shade became sunlight, and the sunlight\
became shade again, and still I sat there waiting for the money.\
\
There never was such another drunken madman in that line of business,\
I hope. That he was well known in the neighbourhood, and enjoyed the\
reputation of having sold himself to the devil, I soon understood from\
the visits he received from the boys, who continually came skirmishing\
about the shop, shouting that legend, and calling to him to bring out\
his gold. \'91You ain\'92t poor, you know, Charley, as you pretend. Bring out\
your gold. Bring out some of the gold you sold yourself to the devil\
for. Come! It\'92s in the lining of the mattress, Charley. Rip it open\
and let\'92s have some!\'92 This, and many offers to lend him a knife for\
the purpose, exasperated him to such a degree, that the whole day was a\
succession of rushes on his part, and flights on the part of the boys.\
Sometimes in his rage he would take me for one of them, and come at me,\
mouthing as if he were going to tear me in pieces; then, remembering\
me, just in time, would dive into the shop, and lie upon his bed, as I\
thought from the sound of his voice, yelling in a frantic way, to his\
own windy tune, the \'91Death of Nelson\'92; with an Oh! before every line,\
and innumerable Goroos interspersed. As if this were not bad enough for\
me, the boys, connecting me with the establishment, on account of the\
patience and perseverance with which I sat outside, half-dressed, pelted\
me, and used me very ill all day.\
\
He made many attempts to induce me to consent to an exchange; at one\
time coming out with a fishing-rod, at another with a fiddle, at another\
with a cocked hat, at another with a flute. But I resisted all these\
overtures, and sat there in desperation; each time asking him, with\
tears in my eyes, for my money or my jacket. At last he began to pay me\
in halfpence at a time; and was full two hours getting by easy stages to\
a shilling.\
\
\'91Oh, my eyes and limbs!\'92 he then cried, peeping hideously out of the\
shop, after a long pause, \'91will you go for twopence more?\'92\
\
\'91I can\'92t,\'92 I said; \'91I shall be starved.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, my lungs and liver, will you go for threepence?\'92\
\
\'91I would go for nothing, if I could,\'92 I said, \'91but I want the money\
badly.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, go-roo!\'92 (it is really impossible to express how he twisted this\
ejaculation out of himself, as he peeped round the door-post at me,\
showing nothing but his crafty old head); \'91will you go for fourpence?\'92\
\
I was so faint and weary that I closed with this offer; and taking the\
money out of his claw, not without trembling, went away more hungry and\
thirsty than I had ever been, a little before sunset. But at an expense\
of threepence I soon refreshed myself completely; and, being in better\
spirits then, limped seven miles upon my road.\
\
My bed at night was under another haystack, where I rested comfortably,\
after having washed my blistered feet in a stream, and dressed them as\
well as I was able, with some cool leaves. When I took the road again\
next morning, I found that it lay through a succession of hop-grounds\
and orchards. It was sufficiently late in the year for the orchards\
to be ruddy with ripe apples; and in a few places the hop-pickers were\
already at work. I thought it all extremely beautiful, and made up\
my mind to sleep among the hops that night: imagining some cheerful\
companionship in the long perspectives of poles, with the graceful\
leaves twining round them.\
\
The trampers were worse than ever that day, and inspired me with a\
dread that is yet quite fresh in my mind. Some of them were most\
ferocious-looking ruffians, who stared at me as I went by; and stopped,\
perhaps, and called after me to come back and speak to them, and when I\
took to my heels, stoned me. I recollect one young fellow--a tinker, I\
suppose, from his wallet and brazier--who had a woman with him, and\
who faced about and stared at me thus; and then roared to me in such a\
tremendous voice to come back, that I halted and looked round.\
\
\'91Come here, when you\'92re called,\'92 said the tinker, \'91or I\'92ll rip your\
young body open.\'92\
\
I thought it best to go back. As I drew nearer to them, trying to\
propitiate the tinker by my looks, I observed that the woman had a black\
eye.\
\
\'91Where are you going?\'92 said the tinker, gripping the bosom of my shirt\
with his blackened hand.\
\
\'91I am going to Dover,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Where do you come from?\'92 asked the tinker, giving his hand another turn\
in my shirt, to hold me more securely.\
\
\'91I come from London,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91What lay are you upon?\'92 asked the tinker. \'91Are you a prig?\'92\
\
\'91N-no,\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Ain\'92t you, by G--? If you make a brag of your honesty to me,\'92 said the\
tinker, \'91I\'92ll knock your brains out.\'92\
\
With his disengaged hand he made a menace of striking me, and then\
looked at me from head to foot.\
\
\'91Have you got the price of a pint of beer about you?\'92 said the tinker.\
\'91If you have, out with it, afore I take it away!\'92\
\
I should certainly have produced it, but that I met the woman\'92s look,\
and saw her very slightly shake her head, and form \'91No!\'92 with her lips.\
\
\'91I am very poor,\'92 I said, attempting to smile, \'91and have got no money.\'92\
\
\'91Why, what do you mean?\'92 said the tinker, looking so sternly at me, that\
I almost feared he saw the money in my pocket.\
\
\'91Sir!\'92 I stammered.\
\
\'91What do you mean,\'92 said the tinker, \'91by wearing my brother\'92s silk\
handkerchief! Give it over here!\'92 And he had mine off my neck in a\
moment, and tossed it to the woman.\
\
The woman burst into a fit of laughter, as if she thought this a joke,\
and tossed it back to me, nodded once, as slightly as before, and made\
the word \'91Go!\'92 with her lips. Before I could obey, however, the tinker\
seized the handkerchief out of my hand with a roughness that threw me\
away like a feather, and putting it loosely round his own neck, turned\
upon the woman with an oath, and knocked her down. I never shall forget\
seeing her fall backward on the hard road, and lie there with her bonnet\
tumbled off, and her hair all whitened in the dust; nor, when I looked\
back from a distance, seeing her sitting on the pathway, which was a\
bank by the roadside, wiping the blood from her face with a corner of\
her shawl, while he went on ahead.\
\
This adventure frightened me so, that, afterwards, when I saw any of\
these people coming, I turned back until I could find a hiding-place,\
where I remained until they had gone out of sight; which happened so\
often, that I was very seriously delayed. But under this difficulty, as\
under all the other difficulties of my journey, I seemed to be sustained\
and led on by my fanciful picture of my mother in her youth, before I\
came into the world. It always kept me company. It was there, among\
the hops, when I lay down to sleep; it was with me on my waking in the\
morning; it went before me all day. I have associated it, ever since,\
with the sunny street of Canterbury, dozing as it were in the hot light;\
and with the sight of its old houses and gateways, and the stately,\
grey Cathedral, with the rooks sailing round the towers. When I came,\
at last, upon the bare, wide downs near Dover, it relieved the solitary\
aspect of the scene with hope; and not until I reached that first great\
aim of my journey, and actually set foot in the town itself, on the\
sixth day of my flight, did it desert me. But then, strange to say,\
when I stood with my ragged shoes, and my dusty, sunburnt, half-clothed\
figure, in the place so long desired, it seemed to vanish like a dream,\
and to leave me helpless and dispirited.\
\
I inquired about my aunt among the boatmen first, and received various\
answers. One said she lived in the South Foreland Light, and had singed\
her whiskers by doing so; another, that she was made fast to the great\
buoy outside the harbour, and could only be visited at half-tide; a\
third, that she was locked up in Maidstone jail for child-stealing; a\
fourth, that she was seen to mount a broom in the last high wind, and\
make direct for Calais. The fly-drivers, among whom I inquired next,\
were equally jocose and equally disrespectful; and the shopkeepers, not\
liking my appearance, generally replied, without hearing what I had\
to say, that they had got nothing for me. I felt more miserable and\
destitute than I had done at any period of my running away. My money was\
all gone, I had nothing left to dispose of; I was hungry, thirsty, and\
worn out; and seemed as distant from my end as if I had remained in\
London.\
\
The morning had worn away in these inquiries, and I was sitting on\
the step of an empty shop at a street corner, near the market-place,\
deliberating upon wandering towards those other places which had been\
mentioned, when a fly-driver, coming by with his carriage, dropped a\
horsecloth. Something good-natured in the man\'92s face, as I handed it up,\
encouraged me to ask him if he could tell me where Miss Trotwood lived;\
though I had asked the question so often, that it almost died upon my\
lips.\
\
\'91Trotwood,\'92 said he. \'91Let me see. I know the name, too. Old lady?\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 I said, \'91rather.\'92\
\
\'91Pretty stiff in the back?\'92 said he, making himself upright.\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 I said. \'91I should think it very likely.\'92\
\
\'91Carries a bag?\'92 said he--\'91bag with a good deal of room in it--is\
gruffish, and comes down upon you, sharp?\'92\
\
My heart sank within me as I acknowledged the undoubted accuracy of this\
description.\
\
\'91Why then, I tell you what,\'92 said he. \'91If you go up there,\'92 pointing\
with his whip towards the heights, \'91and keep right on till you come to\
some houses facing the sea, I think you\'92ll hear of her. My opinion is\
she won\'92t stand anything, so here\'92s a penny for you.\'92\
\
I accepted the gift thankfully, and bought a loaf with it. Dispatching\
this refreshment by the way, I went in the direction my friend had\
indicated, and walked on a good distance without coming to the houses\
he had mentioned. At length I saw some before me; and approaching them,\
went into a little shop (it was what we used to call a general shop,\
at home), and inquired if they could have the goodness to tell me where\
Miss Trotwood lived. I addressed myself to a man behind the counter,\
who was weighing some rice for a young woman; but the latter, taking the\
inquiry to herself, turned round quickly.\
\
\'91My mistress?\'92 she said. \'91What do you want with her, boy?\'92\
\
\'91I want,\'92 I replied, \'91to speak to her, if you please.\'92\
\
\'91To beg of her, you mean,\'92 retorted the damsel.\
\
\'91No,\'92 I said, \'91indeed.\'92 But suddenly remembering that in truth I came\
for no other purpose, I held my peace in confusion, and felt my face\
burn.\
\
My aunt\'92s handmaid, as I supposed she was from what she had said, put\
her rice in a little basket and walked out of the shop; telling me that\
I could follow her, if I wanted to know where Miss Trotwood lived. I\
needed no second permission; though I was by this time in such a state\
of consternation and agitation, that my legs shook under me. I followed\
the young woman, and we soon came to a very neat little cottage with\
cheerful bow-windows: in front of it, a small square gravelled court or\
garden full of flowers, carefully tended, and smelling deliciously.\
\
\'91This is Miss Trotwood\'92s,\'92 said the young woman. \'91Now you know; and\
that\'92s all I have got to say.\'92 With which words she hurried into the\
house, as if to shake off the responsibility of my appearance; and left\
me standing at the garden-gate, looking disconsolately over the top of\
it towards the parlour window, where a muslin curtain partly undrawn\
in the middle, a large round green screen or fan fastened on to the\
windowsill, a small table, and a great chair, suggested to me that my\
aunt might be at that moment seated in awful state.\
\
My shoes were by this time in a woeful condition. The soles had shed\
themselves bit by bit, and the upper leathers had broken and burst until\
the very shape and form of shoes had departed from them. My hat (which\
had served me for a night-cap, too) was so crushed and bent, that no old\
battered handleless saucepan on a dunghill need have been ashamed to vie\
with it. My shirt and trousers, stained with heat, dew, grass, and\
the Kentish soil on which I had slept--and torn besides--might have\
frightened the birds from my aunt\'92s garden, as I stood at the gate. My\
hair had known no comb or brush since I left London. My face, neck, and\
hands, from unaccustomed exposure to the air and sun, were burnt to a\
berry-brown. From head to foot I was powdered almost as white with chalk\
and dust, as if I had come out of a lime-kiln. In this plight, and with\
a strong consciousness of it, I waited to introduce myself to, and make\
my first impression on, my formidable aunt.\
\
The unbroken stillness of the parlour window leading me to infer, after\
a while, that she was not there, I lifted up my eyes to the window above\
it, where I saw a florid, pleasant-looking gentleman, with a grey head,\
who shut up one eye in a grotesque manner, nodded his head at me several\
times, shook it at me as often, laughed, and went away.\
\
I had been discomposed enough before; but I was so much the more\
discomposed by this unexpected behaviour, that I was on the point of\
slinking off, to think how I had best proceed, when there came out of\
the house a lady with her handkerchief tied over her cap, and a pair\
of gardening gloves on her hands, wearing a gardening pocket like a\
toll-man\'92s apron, and carrying a great knife. I knew her immediately\
to be Miss Betsey, for she came stalking out of the house exactly as\
my poor mother had so often described her stalking up our garden at\
Blunderstone Rookery.\
\
\'91Go away!\'92 said Miss Betsey, shaking her head, and making a distant chop\
in the air with her knife. \'91Go along! No boys here!\'92\
\
I watched her, with my heart at my lips, as she marched to a corner of\
her garden, and stooped to dig up some little root there. Then, without\
a scrap of courage, but with a great deal of desperation, I went softly\
in and stood beside her, touching her with my finger.\
\
\'91If you please, ma\'92am,\'92 I began.\
\
She started and looked up.\
\
\'91If you please, aunt.\'92\
\
\'91EH?\'92 exclaimed Miss Betsey, in a tone of amazement I have never heard\
approached.\
\
\'91If you please, aunt, I am your nephew.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, Lord!\'92 said my aunt. And sat flat down in the garden-path.\
\
\'91I am David Copperfield, of Blunderstone, in Suffolk--where you came,\
on the night when I was born, and saw my dear mama. I have been very\
unhappy since she died. I have been slighted, and taught nothing, and\
thrown upon myself, and put to work not fit for me. It made me run away\
to you. I was robbed at first setting out, and have walked all the\
way, and have never slept in a bed since I began the journey.\'92 Here\
my self-support gave way all at once; and with a movement of my hands,\
intended to show her my ragged state, and call it to witness that I had\
suffered something, I broke into a passion of crying, which I suppose\
had been pent up within me all the week.\
\
My aunt, with every sort of expression but wonder discharged from her\
countenance, sat on the gravel, staring at me, until I began to cry;\
when she got up in a great hurry, collared me, and took me into the\
parlour. Her first proceeding there was to unlock a tall press, bring\
out several bottles, and pour some of the contents of each into my\
mouth. I think they must have been taken out at random, for I am sure\
I tasted aniseed water, anchovy sauce, and salad dressing. When she had\
administered these restoratives, as I was still quite hysterical, and\
unable to control my sobs, she put me on the sofa, with a shawl under\
my head, and the handkerchief from her own head under my feet, lest I\
should sully the cover; and then, sitting herself down behind the green\
fan or screen I have already mentioned, so that I could not see her\
face, ejaculated at intervals, \'91Mercy on us!\'92 letting those exclamations\
off like minute guns.\
\
After a time she rang the bell. \'91Janet,\'92 said my aunt, when her servant\
came in. \'91Go upstairs, give my compliments to Mr. Dick, and say I wish\
to speak to him.\'92\
\
Janet looked a little surprised to see me lying stiffly on the sofa (I\
was afraid to move lest it should be displeasing to my aunt), but went\
on her errand. My aunt, with her hands behind her, walked up and down\
the room, until the gentleman who had squinted at me from the upper\
window came in laughing.\
\
\'91Mr. Dick,\'92 said my aunt, \'91don\'92t be a fool, because nobody can be more\
discreet than you can, when you choose. We all know that. So don\'92t be a\
fool, whatever you are.\'92\
\
The gentleman was serious immediately, and looked at me, I thought, as\
if he would entreat me to say nothing about the window.\
\
\'91Mr. Dick,\'92 said my aunt, \'91you have heard me mention David Copperfield?\
Now don\'92t pretend not to have a memory, because you and I know better.\'92\
\
\'91David Copperfield?\'92 said Mr. Dick, who did not appear to me to\
remember much about it. \'91David Copperfield? Oh yes, to be sure. David,\
certainly.\'92\
\
\'91Well,\'92 said my aunt, \'91this is his boy--his son. He would be as like his\
father as it\'92s possible to be, if he was not so like his mother, too.\'92\
\
\'91His son?\'92 said Mr. Dick. \'91David\'92s son? Indeed!\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 pursued my aunt, \'91and he has done a pretty piece of business.\
He has run away. Ah! His sister, Betsey Trotwood, never would have run\
away.\'92 My aunt shook her head firmly, confident in the character and\
behaviour of the girl who never was born.\
\
\'91Oh! you think she wouldn\'92t have run away?\'92 said Mr. Dick.\
\
\'91Bless and save the man,\'92 exclaimed my aunt, sharply, \'91how he talks!\
Don\'92t I know she wouldn\'92t? She would have lived with her god-mother,\
and we should have been devoted to one another. Where, in the name of\
wonder, should his sister, Betsey Trotwood, have run from, or to?\'92\
\
\'91Nowhere,\'92 said Mr. Dick.\
\
\'91Well then,\'92 returned my aunt, softened by the reply, \'91how can you\
pretend to be wool-gathering, Dick, when you are as sharp as a surgeon\'92s\
lancet? Now, here you see young David Copperfield, and the question I\
put to you is, what shall I do with him?\'92\
\
\'91What shall you do with him?\'92 said Mr. Dick, feebly, scratching his\
head. \'91Oh! do with him?\'92\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said my aunt, with a grave look, and her forefinger held up.\
\'91Come! I want some very sound advice.\'92\
\
\'91Why, if I was you,\'92 said Mr. Dick, considering, and looking vacantly\
at me, \'91I should--\'92 The contemplation of me seemed to inspire him with a\
sudden idea, and he added, briskly, \'91I should wash him!\'92\
\
\'91Janet,\'92 said my aunt, turning round with a quiet triumph, which I did\
not then understand, \'91Mr. Dick sets us all right. Heat the bath!\'92\
\
Although I was deeply interested in this dialogue, I could not help\
observing my aunt, Mr. Dick, and Janet, while it was in progress, and\
completing a survey I had already been engaged in making of the room.\
\
My aunt was a tall, hard-featured lady, but by no means ill-looking.\
There was an inflexibility in her face, in her voice, in her gait and\
carriage, amply sufficient to account for the effect she had made upon\
a gentle creature like my mother; but her features were rather handsome\
than otherwise, though unbending and austere. I particularly noticed\
that she had a very quick, bright eye. Her hair, which was grey, was\
arranged in two plain divisions, under what I believe would be called a\
mob-cap; I mean a cap, much more common then than now, with side-pieces\
fastening under the chin. Her dress was of a lavender colour, and\
perfectly neat; but scantily made, as if she desired to be as little\
encumbered as possible. I remember that I thought it, in form, more like\
a riding-habit with the superfluous skirt cut off, than anything else.\
She wore at her side a gentleman\'92s gold watch, if I might judge from its\
size and make, with an appropriate chain and seals; she had some linen\
at her throat not unlike a shirt-collar, and things at her wrists like\
little shirt-wristbands.\
\
Mr. Dick, as I have already said, was grey-headed, and florid: I should\
have said all about him, in saying so, had not his head been curiously\
bowed--not by age; it reminded me of one of Mr. Creakle\'92s boys\'92 heads\
after a beating--and his grey eyes prominent and large, with a strange\
kind of watery brightness in them that made me, in combination with his\
vacant manner, his submission to my aunt, and his childish delight when\
she praised him, suspect him of being a little mad; though, if he were\
mad, how he came to be there puzzled me extremely. He was dressed\
like any other ordinary gentleman, in a loose grey morning coat and\
waistcoat, and white trousers; and had his watch in his fob, and his\
money in his pockets: which he rattled as if he were very proud of it.\
\
Janet was a pretty blooming girl, of about nineteen or twenty, and a\
perfect picture of neatness. Though I made no further observation of\
her at the moment, I may mention here what I did not discover until\
afterwards, namely, that she was one of a series of protegees whom my\
aunt had taken into her service expressly to educate in a renouncement\
of mankind, and who had generally completed their abjuration by marrying\
the baker.\
\
The room was as neat as Janet or my aunt. As I laid down my pen, a\
moment since, to think of it, the air from the sea came blowing\
in again, mixed with the perfume of the flowers; and I saw the\
old-fashioned furniture brightly rubbed and polished, my aunt\'92s\
inviolable chair and table by the round green fan in the bow-window, the\
drugget-covered carpet, the cat, the kettle-holder, the two canaries,\
the old china, the punchbowl full of dried rose-leaves, the tall press\
guarding all sorts of bottles and pots, and, wonderfully out of keeping\
with the rest, my dusty self upon the sofa, taking note of everything.\
\
Janet had gone away to get the bath ready, when my aunt, to my great\
alarm, became in one moment rigid with indignation, and had hardly voice\
to cry out, \'91Janet! Donkeys!\'92\
\
Upon which, Janet came running up the stairs as if the house were in\
flames, darted out on a little piece of green in front, and warned off\
two saddle-donkeys, lady-ridden, that had presumed to set hoof upon it;\
while my aunt, rushing out of the house, seized the bridle of a third\
animal laden with a bestriding child, turned him, led him forth from\
those sacred precincts, and boxed the ears of the unlucky urchin in\
attendance who had dared to profane that hallowed ground.\
\
To this hour I don\'92t know whether my aunt had any lawful right of way\
over that patch of green; but she had settled it in her own mind that\
she had, and it was all the same to her. The one great outrage of her\
life, demanding to be constantly avenged, was the passage of a donkey\
over that immaculate spot. In whatever occupation she was engaged,\
however interesting to her the conversation in which she was taking\
part, a donkey turned the current of her ideas in a moment, and she was\
upon him straight. Jugs of water, and watering-pots, were kept in secret\
places ready to be discharged on the offending boys; sticks were laid\
in ambush behind the door; sallies were made at all hours; and\
incessant war prevailed. Perhaps this was an agreeable excitement to the\
donkey-boys; or perhaps the more sagacious of the donkeys, understanding\
how the case stood, delighted with constitutional obstinacy in coming\
that way. I only know that there were three alarms before the bath was\
ready; and that on the occasion of the last and most desperate of all,\
I saw my aunt engage, single-handed, with a sandy-headed lad of fifteen,\
and bump his sandy head against her own gate, before he seemed to\
comprehend what was the matter. These interruptions were of the more\
ridiculous to me, because she was giving me broth out of a table-spoon\
at the time (having firmly persuaded herself that I was actually\
starving, and must receive nourishment at first in very small\
quantities), and, while my mouth was yet open to receive the spoon, she\
would put it back into the basin, cry \'91Janet! Donkeys!\'92 and go out to\
the assault.\
\
The bath was a great comfort. For I began to be sensible of acute pains\
in my limbs from lying out in the fields, and was now so tired and low\
that I could hardly keep myself awake for five minutes together. When I\
had bathed, they (I mean my aunt and Janet) enrobed me in a shirt and a\
pair of trousers belonging to Mr. Dick, and tied me up in two or three\
great shawls. What sort of bundle I looked like, I don\'92t know, but I\
felt a very hot one. Feeling also very faint and drowsy, I soon lay down\
on the sofa again and fell asleep.\
\
It might have been a dream, originating in the fancy which had occupied\
my mind so long, but I awoke with the impression that my aunt had come\
and bent over me, and had put my hair away from my face, and laid my\
head more comfortably, and had then stood looking at me. The words,\
\'91Pretty fellow,\'92 or \'91Poor fellow,\'92 seemed to be in my ears, too; but\
certainly there was nothing else, when I awoke, to lead me to believe\
that they had been uttered by my aunt, who sat in the bow-window gazing\
at the sea from behind the green fan, which was mounted on a kind of\
swivel, and turned any way.\
\
We dined soon after I awoke, off a roast fowl and a pudding; I sitting\
at table, not unlike a trussed bird myself, and moving my arms with\
considerable difficulty. But as my aunt had swathed me up, I made no\
complaint of being inconvenienced. All this time I was deeply anxious\
to know what she was going to do with me; but she took her dinner in\
profound silence, except when she occasionally fixed her eyes on me\
sitting opposite, and said, \'91Mercy upon us!\'92 which did not by any means\
relieve my anxiety.\
\
The cloth being drawn, and some sherry put upon the table (of which I\
had a glass), my aunt sent up for Mr. Dick again, who joined us, and\
looked as wise as he could when she requested him to attend to my story,\
which she elicited from me, gradually, by a course of questions. During\
my recital, she kept her eyes on Mr. Dick, who I thought would have gone\
to sleep but for that, and who, whensoever he lapsed into a smile, was\
checked by a frown from my aunt.\
\
\'91Whatever possessed that poor unfortunate Baby, that she must go and be\
married again,\'92 said my aunt, when I had finished, \'91I can\'92t conceive.\'92\
\
\'91Perhaps she fell in love with her second husband,\'92 Mr. Dick suggested.\
\
\'91Fell in love!\'92 repeated my aunt. \'91What do you mean? What business had\
she to do it?\'92\
\
\'91Perhaps,\'92 Mr. Dick simpered, after thinking a little, \'91she did it for\
pleasure.\'92\
\
\'91Pleasure, indeed!\'92 replied my aunt. \'91A mighty pleasure for the poor\
Baby to fix her simple faith upon any dog of a fellow, certain to\
ill-use her in some way or other. What did she propose to herself,\
I should like to know! She had had one husband. She had seen David\
Copperfield out of the world, who was always running after wax dolls\
from his cradle. She had got a baby--oh, there were a pair of babies\
when she gave birth to this child sitting here, that Friday night!--and\
what more did she want?\'92\
\
Mr. Dick secretly shook his head at me, as if he thought there was no\
getting over this.\
\
\'91She couldn\'92t even have a baby like anybody else,\'92 said my aunt. \'91Where\
was this child\'92s sister, Betsey Trotwood? Not forthcoming. Don\'92t tell\
me!\'92\
\
Mr. Dick seemed quite frightened.\
\
\'91That little man of a doctor, with his head on one side,\'92 said my aunt,\
\'91Jellips, or whatever his name was, what was he about? All he could do,\
was to say to me, like a robin redbreast--as he is--\'93It\'92s a boy.\'94 A boy!\
Yah, the imbecility of the whole set of \'91em!\'92\
\
The heartiness of the ejaculation startled Mr. Dick exceedingly; and me,\
too, if I am to tell the truth.\
\
\'91And then, as if this was not enough, and she had not stood sufficiently\
in the light of this child\'92s sister, Betsey Trotwood,\'92 said my aunt,\
\'91she marries a second time--goes and marries a Murderer--or a man with\
a name like it--and stands in THIS child\'92s light! And the natural\
consequence is, as anybody but a baby might have foreseen, that he\
prowls and wanders. He\'92s as like Cain before he was grown up, as he can\
be.\'92\
\
Mr. Dick looked hard at me, as if to identify me in this character.\
\
\'91And then there\'92s that woman with the Pagan name,\'92 said my aunt, \'91that\
Peggotty, she goes and gets married next. Because she has not seen\
enough of the evil attending such things, she goes and gets married\
next, as the child relates. I only hope,\'92 said my aunt, shaking her\
head, \'91that her husband is one of those Poker husbands who abound in the\
newspapers, and will beat her well with one.\'92\
\
I could not bear to hear my old nurse so decried, and made the subject\
of such a wish. I told my aunt that indeed she was mistaken. That\
Peggotty was the best, the truest, the most faithful, most devoted, and\
most self-denying friend and servant in the world; who had ever loved\
me dearly, who had ever loved my mother dearly; who had held my mother\'92s\
dying head upon her arm, on whose face my mother had imprinted her last\
grateful kiss. And my remembrance of them both, choking me, I broke down\
as I was trying to say that her home was my home, and that all she had\
was mine, and that I would have gone to her for shelter, but for her\
humble station, which made me fear that I might bring some trouble on\
her--I broke down, I say, as I was trying to say so, and laid my face in\
my hands upon the table.\
\
\'91Well, well!\'92 said my aunt, \'91the child is right to stand by those who\
have stood by him--Janet! Donkeys!\'92\
\
I thoroughly believe that but for those unfortunate donkeys, we should\
have come to a good understanding; for my aunt had laid her hand on my\
shoulder, and the impulse was upon me, thus emboldened, to embrace her\
and beseech her protection. But the interruption, and the disorder she\
was thrown into by the struggle outside, put an end to all softer ideas\
for the present, and kept my aunt indignantly declaiming to Mr. Dick\
about her determination to appeal for redress to the laws of her\
country, and to bring actions for trespass against the whole donkey\
proprietorship of Dover, until tea-time.\
\
After tea, we sat at the window--on the look-out, as I imagined, from\
my aunt\'92s sharp expression of face, for more invaders--until dusk, when\
Janet set candles, and a backgammon-board, on the table, and pulled down\
the blinds.\
\
\'91Now, Mr. Dick,\'92 said my aunt, with her grave look, and her forefinger\
up as before, \'91I am going to ask you another question. Look at this\
child.\'92\
\
\'91David\'92s son?\'92 said Mr. Dick, with an attentive, puzzled face.\
\
\'91Exactly so,\'92 returned my aunt. \'91What would you do with him, now?\'92\
\
\'91Do with David\'92s son?\'92 said Mr. Dick.\
\
\'91Ay,\'92 replied my aunt, \'91with David\'92s son.\'92\
\
\'91Oh!\'92 said Mr. Dick. \'91Yes. Do with--I should put him to bed.\'92\
\
\'91Janet!\'92 cried my aunt, with the same complacent triumph that I had\
remarked before. \'91Mr. Dick sets us all right. If the bed is ready, we\'92ll\
take him up to it.\'92\
\
Janet reporting it to be quite ready, I was taken up to it; kindly, but\
in some sort like a prisoner; my aunt going in front and Janet bringing\
up the rear. The only circumstance which gave me any new hope, was my\
aunt\'92s stopping on the stairs to inquire about a smell of fire that was\
prevalent there; and janet\'92s replying that she had been making tinder\
down in the kitchen, of my old shirt. But there were no other clothes in\
my room than the odd heap of things I wore; and when I was left there,\
with a little taper which my aunt forewarned me would burn exactly five\
minutes, I heard them lock my door on the outside. Turning these things\
over in my mind I deemed it possible that my aunt, who could know\
nothing of me, might suspect I had a habit of running away, and took\
precautions, on that account, to have me in safe keeping.\
\
The room was a pleasant one, at the top of the house, overlooking the\
sea, on which the moon was shining brilliantly. After I had said my\
prayers, and the candle had burnt out, I remember how I still sat\
looking at the moonlight on the water, as if I could hope to read my\
fortune in it, as in a bright book; or to see my mother with her child,\
coming from Heaven, along that shining path, to look upon me as she had\
looked when I last saw her sweet face. I remember how the solemn feeling\
with which at length I turned my eyes away, yielded to the sensation of\
gratitude and rest which the sight of the white-curtained bed--and how\
much more the lying softly down upon it, nestling in the snow-white\
sheets!--inspired. I remember how I thought of all the solitary places\
under the night sky where I had slept, and how I prayed that I never\
might be houseless any more, and never might forget the houseless. I\
remember how I seemed to float, then, down the melancholy glory of that\
track upon the sea, away into the world of dreams.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 14. MY AUNT MAKES UP HER MIND ABOUT ME\
\
\
On going down in the morning, I found my aunt musing so profoundly over\
the breakfast table, with her elbow on the tray, that the contents of\
the urn had overflowed the teapot and were laying the whole table-cloth\
under water, when my entrance put her meditations to flight. I felt sure\
that I had been the subject of her reflections, and was more than ever\
anxious to know her intentions towards me. Yet I dared not express my\
anxiety, lest it should give her offence.\
\
My eyes, however, not being so much under control as my tongue, were\
attracted towards my aunt very often during breakfast. I never could\
look at her for a few moments together but I found her looking at me--in\
an odd thoughtful manner, as if I were an immense way off, instead of\
being on the other side of the small round table. When she had finished\
her breakfast, my aunt very deliberately leaned back in her chair,\
knitted her brows, folded her arms, and contemplated me at her leisure,\
with such a fixedness of attention that I was quite overpowered by\
embarrassment. Not having as yet finished my own breakfast, I attempted\
to hide my confusion by proceeding with it; but my knife tumbled over my\
fork, my fork tripped up my knife, I chipped bits of bacon a surprising\
height into the air instead of cutting them for my own eating, and\
choked myself with my tea, which persisted in going the wrong way\
instead of the right one, until I gave in altogether, and sat blushing\
under my aunt\'92s close scrutiny.\
\
\'91Hallo!\'92 said my aunt, after a long time.\
\
I looked up, and met her sharp bright glance respectfully.\
\
\'91I have written to him,\'92 said my aunt.\
\
\'91To--?\'92\
\
\'91To your father-in-law,\'92 said my aunt. \'91I have sent him a letter that\
I\'92ll trouble him to attend to, or he and I will fall out, I can tell\
him!\'92\
\
\'91Does he know where I am, aunt?\'92 I inquired, alarmed.\
\
\'91I have told him,\'92 said my aunt, with a nod.\
\
\'91Shall I--be--given up to him?\'92 I faltered.\
\
\'91I don\'92t know,\'92 said my aunt. \'91We shall see.\'92\
\
\'91Oh! I can\'92t think what I shall do,\'92 I exclaimed, \'91if I have to go back\
to Mr. Murdstone!\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know anything about it,\'92 said my aunt, shaking her head. \'91I\
can\'92t say, I am sure. We shall see.\'92\
\
My spirits sank under these words, and I became very downcast and heavy\
of heart. My aunt, without appearing to take much heed of me, put on a\
coarse apron with a bib, which she took out of the press; washed up the\
teacups with her own hands; and, when everything was washed and set in\
the tray again, and the cloth folded and put on the top of the whole,\
rang for Janet to remove it. She next swept up the crumbs with a little\
broom (putting on a pair of gloves first), until there did not appear\
to be one microscopic speck left on the carpet; next dusted and arranged\
the room, which was dusted and arranged to a hair\'92s breadth already.\
When all these tasks were performed to her satisfaction, she took off\
the gloves and apron, folded them up, put them in the particular corner\
of the press from which they had been taken, brought out her work-box\
to her own table in the open window, and sat down, with the green fan\
between her and the light, to work.\
\
\'91I wish you\'92d go upstairs,\'92 said my aunt, as she threaded her needle,\
\'91and give my compliments to Mr. Dick, and I\'92ll be glad to know how he\
gets on with his Memorial.\'92\
\
I rose with all alacrity, to acquit myself of this commission.\
\
\'91I suppose,\'92 said my aunt, eyeing me as narrowly as she had eyed the\
needle in threading it, \'91you think Mr. Dick a short name, eh?\'92\
\
\'91I thought it was rather a short name, yesterday,\'92 I confessed.\
\
\'91You are not to suppose that he hasn\'92t got a longer name, if he chose\
to use it,\'92 said my aunt, with a loftier air. \'91Babley--Mr. Richard\
Babley--that\'92s the gentleman\'92s true name.\'92\
\
I was going to suggest, with a modest sense of my youth and the\
familiarity I had been already guilty of, that I had better give him the\
full benefit of that name, when my aunt went on to say:\
\
\'91But don\'92t you call him by it, whatever you do. He can\'92t bear his name.\
That\'92s a peculiarity of his. Though I don\'92t know that it\'92s much of a\
peculiarity, either; for he has been ill-used enough, by some that bear\
it, to have a mortal antipathy for it, Heaven knows. Mr. Dick is his\
name here, and everywhere else, now--if he ever went anywhere else,\
which he don\'92t. So take care, child, you don\'92t call him anything BUT Mr.\
Dick.\'92\
\
I promised to obey, and went upstairs with my message; thinking, as I\
went, that if Mr. Dick had been working at his Memorial long, at the\
same rate as I had seen him working at it, through the open door, when\
I came down, he was probably getting on very well indeed. I found him\
still driving at it with a long pen, and his head almost laid upon the\
paper. He was so intent upon it, that I had ample leisure to observe the\
large paper kite in a corner, the confusion of bundles of manuscript,\
the number of pens, and, above all, the quantity of ink (which he seemed\
to have in, in half-gallon jars by the dozen), before he observed my\
being present.\
\
\'91Ha! Phoebus!\'92 said Mr. Dick, laying down his pen. \'91How does the world\
go? I\'92ll tell you what,\'92 he added, in a lower tone, \'91I shouldn\'92t wish it\
to be mentioned, but it\'92s a--\'92 here he beckoned to me, and put his lips\
close to my ear--\'91it\'92s a mad world. Mad as Bedlam, boy!\'92 said Mr. Dick,\
taking snuff from a round box on the table, and laughing heartily.\
\
Without presuming to give my opinion on this question, I delivered my\
message.\
\
\'91Well,\'92 said Mr. Dick, in answer, \'91my compliments to her, and I--I\
believe I have made a start. I think I have made a start,\'92 said Mr.\
Dick, passing his hand among his grey hair, and casting anything but a\
confident look at his manuscript. \'91You have been to school?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, sir,\'92 I answered; \'91for a short time.\'92\
\
\'91Do you recollect the date,\'92 said Mr. Dick, looking earnestly at me, and\
taking up his pen to note it down, \'91when King Charles the First had his\
head cut off?\'92 I said I believed it happened in the year sixteen hundred\
and forty-nine.\
\
\'91Well,\'92 returned Mr. Dick, scratching his ear with his pen, and looking\
dubiously at me. \'91So the books say; but I don\'92t see how that can be.\
Because, if it was so long ago, how could the people about him have made\
that mistake of putting some of the trouble out of his head, after it\
was taken off, into mine?\'92\
\
I was very much surprised by the inquiry; but could give no information\
on this point.\
\
\'91It\'92s very strange,\'92 said Mr. Dick, with a despondent look upon his\
papers, and with his hand among his hair again, \'91that I never can get\
that quite right. I never can make that perfectly clear. But no matter,\
no matter!\'92 he said cheerfully, and rousing himself, \'91there\'92s time\
enough! My compliments to Miss Trotwood, I am getting on very well\
indeed.\'92\
\
I was going away, when he directed my attention to the kite.\
\
\'91What do you think of that for a kite?\'92 he said.\
\
I answered that it was a beautiful one. I should think it must have been\
as much as seven feet high.\
\
\'91I made it. We\'92ll go and fly it, you and I,\'92 said Mr. Dick. \'91Do you see\
this?\'92\
\
He showed me that it was covered with manuscript, very closely and\
laboriously written; but so plainly, that as I looked along the lines,\
I thought I saw some allusion to King Charles the First\'92s head again, in\
one or two places.\
\
\'91There\'92s plenty of string,\'92 said Mr. Dick, \'91and when it flies high, it\
takes the facts a long way. That\'92s my manner of diffusing \'91em. I don\'92t\
know where they may come down. It\'92s according to circumstances, and the\
wind, and so forth; but I take my chance of that.\'92\
\
His face was so very mild and pleasant, and had something so reverend in\
it, though it was hale and hearty, that I was not sure but that he was\
having a good-humoured jest with me. So I laughed, and he laughed, and\
we parted the best friends possible.\
\
\'91Well, child,\'92 said my aunt, when I went downstairs. \'91And what of Mr.\
Dick, this morning?\'92\
\
I informed her that he sent his compliments, and was getting on very\
well indeed.\
\
\'91What do you think of him?\'92 said my aunt.\
\
I had some shadowy idea of endeavouring to evade the question, by\
replying that I thought him a very nice gentleman; but my aunt was\
not to be so put off, for she laid her work down in her lap, and said,\
folding her hands upon it:\
\
\'91Come! Your sister Betsey Trotwood would have told me what she thought\
of anyone, directly. Be as like your sister as you can, and speak out!\'92\
\
\'91Is he--is Mr. Dick--I ask because I don\'92t know, aunt--is he at all out\
of his mind, then?\'92 I stammered; for I felt I was on dangerous ground.\
\
\'91Not a morsel,\'92 said my aunt.\
\
\'91Oh, indeed!\'92 I observed faintly.\
\
\'91If there is anything in the world,\'92 said my aunt, with great decision\
and force of manner, \'91that Mr. Dick is not, it\'92s that.\'92\
\
I had nothing better to offer, than another timid, \'91Oh, indeed!\'92\
\
\'91He has been CALLED mad,\'92 said my aunt. \'91I have a selfish pleasure in\
saying he has been called mad, or I should not have had the benefit of\
his society and advice for these last ten years and upwards--in fact,\
ever since your sister, Betsey Trotwood, disappointed me.\'92\
\
\'91So long as that?\'92 I said.\
\
\'91And nice people they were, who had the audacity to call him mad,\'92\
pursued my aunt. \'91Mr. Dick is a sort of distant connexion of mine--it\
doesn\'92t matter how; I needn\'92t enter into that. If it hadn\'92t been for me,\
his own brother would have shut him up for life. That\'92s all.\'92\
\
I am afraid it was hypocritical in me, but seeing that my aunt felt\
strongly on the subject, I tried to look as if I felt strongly too.\
\
\'91A proud fool!\'92 said my aunt. \'91Because his brother was a little\
eccentric--though he is not half so eccentric as a good many people--he\
didn\'92t like to have him visible about his house, and sent him away to\
some private asylum-place: though he had been left to his particular\
care by their deceased father, who thought him almost a natural. And a\
wise man he must have been to think so! Mad himself, no doubt.\'92\
\
Again, as my aunt looked quite convinced, I endeavoured to look quite\
convinced also.\
\
\'91So I stepped in,\'92 said my aunt, \'91and made him an offer. I said, \'93Your\
brother\'92s sane--a great deal more sane than you are, or ever will be, it\
is to be hoped. Let him have his little income, and come and live with\
me. I am not afraid of him, I am not proud, I am ready to take care\
of him, and shall not ill-treat him as some people (besides the\
asylum-folks) have done.\'94 After a good deal of squabbling,\'92 said my\
aunt, \'91I got him; and he has been here ever since. He is the most\
friendly and amenable creature in existence; and as for advice!--But\
nobody knows what that man\'92s mind is, except myself.\'92\
\
My aunt smoothed her dress and shook her head, as if she smoothed\
defiance of the whole world out of the one, and shook it out of the\
other.\
\
\'91He had a favourite sister,\'92 said my aunt, \'91a good creature, and very\
kind to him. But she did what they all do--took a husband. And HE did\
what they all do--made her wretched. It had such an effect upon the mind\
of Mr. Dick (that\'92s not madness, I hope!) that, combined with his fear\
of his brother, and his sense of his unkindness, it threw him into a\
fever. That was before he came to me, but the recollection of it is\
oppressive to him even now. Did he say anything to you about King\
Charles the First, child?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, aunt.\'92\
\
\'91Ah!\'92 said my aunt, rubbing her nose as if she were a little vexed.\
\'91That\'92s his allegorical way of expressing it. He connects his illness\
with great disturbance and agitation, naturally, and that\'92s the figure,\
or the simile, or whatever it\'92s called, which he chooses to use. And why\
shouldn\'92t he, if he thinks proper!\'92\
\
I said: \'91Certainly, aunt.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s not a business-like way of speaking,\'92 said my aunt, \'91nor a worldly\
way. I am aware of that; and that\'92s the reason why I insist upon it,\
that there shan\'92t be a word about it in his Memorial.\'92\
\
\'91Is it a Memorial about his own history that he is writing, aunt?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, child,\'92 said my aunt, rubbing her nose again. \'91He is memorializing\
the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord Somebody or other--one of those people,\
at all events, who are paid to be memorialized--about his affairs. I\
suppose it will go in, one of these days. He hasn\'92t been able to draw\
it up yet, without introducing that mode of expressing himself; but it\
don\'92t signify; it keeps him employed.\'92\
\
In fact, I found out afterwards that Mr. Dick had been for upwards\
of ten years endeavouring to keep King Charles the First out of the\
Memorial; but he had been constantly getting into it, and was there now.\
\
\'91I say again,\'92 said my aunt, \'91nobody knows what that man\'92s mind is\
except myself; and he\'92s the most amenable and friendly creature in\
existence. If he likes to fly a kite sometimes, what of that! Franklin\
used to fly a kite. He was a Quaker, or something of that sort, if I\
am not mistaken. And a Quaker flying a kite is a much more ridiculous\
object than anybody else.\'92\
\
If I could have supposed that my aunt had recounted these particulars\
for my especial behoof, and as a piece of confidence in me, I should\
have felt very much distinguished, and should have augured favourably\
from such a mark of her good opinion. But I could hardly help observing\
that she had launched into them, chiefly because the question was raised\
in her own mind, and with very little reference to me, though she had\
addressed herself to me in the absence of anybody else.\
\
At the same time, I must say that the generosity of her championship\
of poor harmless Mr. Dick, not only inspired my young breast with\
some selfish hope for myself, but warmed it unselfishly towards her.\
I believe that I began to know that there was something about my aunt,\
notwithstanding her many eccentricities and odd humours, to be honoured\
and trusted in. Though she was just as sharp that day as on the day\
before, and was in and out about the donkeys just as often, and was\
thrown into a tremendous state of indignation, when a young man, going\
by, ogled Janet at a window (which was one of the gravest misdemeanours\
that could be committed against my aunt\'92s dignity), she seemed to me to\
command more of my respect, if not less of my fear.\
\
The anxiety I underwent, in the interval which necessarily elapsed\
before a reply could be received to her letter to Mr. Murdstone, was\
extreme; but I made an endeavour to suppress it, and to be as agreeable\
as I could in a quiet way, both to my aunt and Mr. Dick. The latter and\
I would have gone out to fly the great kite; but that I had still no\
other clothes than the anything but ornamental garments with which I\
had been decorated on the first day, and which confined me to the house,\
except for an hour after dark, when my aunt, for my health\'92s sake,\
paraded me up and down on the cliff outside, before going to bed. At\
length the reply from Mr. Murdstone came, and my aunt informed me, to my\
infinite terror, that he was coming to speak to her herself on the next\
day. On the next day, still bundled up in my curious habiliments, I sat\
counting the time, flushed and heated by the conflict of sinking hopes\
and rising fears within me; and waiting to be startled by the sight of\
the gloomy face, whose non-arrival startled me every minute.\
\
My aunt was a little more imperious and stern than usual, but I observed\
no other token of her preparing herself to receive the visitor so much\
dreaded by me. She sat at work in the window, and I sat by, with my\
thoughts running astray on all possible and impossible results of Mr.\
Murdstone\'92s visit, until pretty late in the afternoon. Our dinner had\
been indefinitely postponed; but it was growing so late, that my aunt\
had ordered it to be got ready, when she gave a sudden alarm of donkeys,\
and to my consternation and amazement, I beheld Miss Murdstone, on a\
side-saddle, ride deliberately over the sacred piece of green, and stop\
in front of the house, looking about her.\
\
\'91Go along with you!\'92 cried my aunt, shaking her head and her fist at the\
window. \'91You have no business there. How dare you trespass? Go along!\
Oh! you bold-faced thing!\'92\
\
My aunt was so exasperated by the coolness with which Miss Murdstone\
looked about her, that I really believe she was motionless, and unable\
for the moment to dart out according to custom. I seized the opportunity\
to inform her who it was; and that the gentleman now coming near the\
offender (for the way up was very steep, and he had dropped behind), was\
Mr. Murdstone himself.\
\
\'91I don\'92t care who it is!\'92 cried my aunt, still shaking her head and\
gesticulating anything but welcome from the bow-window. \'91I won\'92t be\
trespassed upon. I won\'92t allow it. Go away! Janet, turn him round.\
Lead him off!\'92 and I saw, from behind my aunt, a sort of hurried\
battle-piece, in which the donkey stood resisting everybody, with all\
his four legs planted different ways, while Janet tried to pull him\
round by the bridle, Mr. Murdstone tried to lead him on, Miss Murdstone\
struck at Janet with a parasol, and several boys, who had come to see\
the engagement, shouted vigorously. But my aunt, suddenly descrying\
among them the young malefactor who was the donkey\'92s guardian, and who\
was one of the most inveterate offenders against her, though hardly in\
his teens, rushed out to the scene of action, pounced upon him, captured\
him, dragged him, with his jacket over his head, and his heels grinding\
the ground, into the garden, and, calling upon Janet to fetch the\
constables and justices, that he might be taken, tried, and executed on\
the spot, held him at bay there. This part of the business, however, did\
not last long; for the young rascal, being expert at a variety of feints\
and dodges, of which my aunt had no conception, soon went whooping away,\
leaving some deep impressions of his nailed boots in the flower-beds,\
and taking his donkey in triumph with him.\
\
Miss Murdstone, during the latter portion of the contest, had\
dismounted, and was now waiting with her brother at the bottom of the\
steps, until my aunt should be at leisure to receive them. My aunt, a\
little ruffled by the combat, marched past them into the house, with\
great dignity, and took no notice of their presence, until they were\
announced by Janet.\
\
\'91Shall I go away, aunt?\'92 I asked, trembling.\
\
\'91No, sir,\'92 said my aunt. \'91Certainly not!\'92 With which she pushed me into\
a corner near her, and fenced Me in with a chair, as if it were a prison\
or a bar of justice. This position I continued to occupy during the\
whole interview, and from it I now saw Mr. and Miss Murdstone enter the\
room.\
\
\'91Oh!\'92 said my aunt, \'91I was not aware at first to whom I had the pleasure\
of objecting. But I don\'92t allow anybody to ride over that turf. I make\
no exceptions. I don\'92t allow anybody to do it.\'92\
\
\'91Your regulation is rather awkward to strangers,\'92 said Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91Is it!\'92 said my aunt.\
\
Mr. Murdstone seemed afraid of a renewal of hostilities, and interposing\
began:\
\
\'91Miss Trotwood!\'92\
\
\'91I beg your pardon,\'92 observed my aunt with a keen look. \'91You are the Mr.\
Murdstone who married the widow of my late nephew, David Copperfield, of\
Blunderstone Rookery!--Though why Rookery, I don\'92t know!\'92\
\
\'91I am,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone.\
\
\'91You\'92ll excuse my saying, sir,\'92 returned my aunt, \'91that I think it would\
have been a much better and happier thing if you had left that poor\
child alone.\'92\
\
\'91I so far agree with what Miss Trotwood has remarked,\'92 observed Miss\
Murdstone, bridling, \'91that I consider our lamented Clara to have been,\
in all essential respects, a mere child.\'92\
\
\'91It is a comfort to you and me, ma\'92am,\'92 said my aunt, \'91who are getting\
on in life, and are not likely to be made unhappy by our personal\
attractions, that nobody can say the same of us.\'92\
\
\'91No doubt!\'92 returned Miss Murdstone, though, I thought, not with a very\
ready or gracious assent. \'91And it certainly might have been, as you say,\
a better and happier thing for my brother if he had never entered into\
such a marriage. I have always been of that opinion.\'92\
\
\'91I have no doubt you have,\'92 said my aunt. \'91Janet,\'92 ringing the bell, \'91my\
compliments to Mr. Dick, and beg him to come down.\'92\
\
Until he came, my aunt sat perfectly upright and stiff, frowning at the\
wall. When he came, my aunt performed the ceremony of introduction.\
\
\'91Mr. Dick. An old and intimate friend. On whose judgement,\'92 said my\
aunt, with emphasis, as an admonition to Mr. Dick, who was biting his\
forefinger and looking rather foolish, \'91I rely.\'92\
\
Mr. Dick took his finger out of his mouth, on this hint, and stood among\
the group, with a grave and attentive expression of face.\
\
My aunt inclined her head to Mr. Murdstone, who went on:\
\
\'91Miss Trotwood: on the receipt of your letter, I considered it an act of\
greater justice to myself, and perhaps of more respect to you--\'92\
\
\'91Thank you,\'92 said my aunt, still eyeing him keenly. \'91You needn\'92t mind\
me.\'92\
\
\'91To answer it in person, however inconvenient the journey,\'92 pursued Mr.\
Murdstone, \'91rather than by letter. This unhappy boy who has run away\
from his friends and his occupation--\'92\
\
\'91And whose appearance,\'92 interposed his sister, directing general\
attention to me in my indefinable costume, \'91is perfectly scandalous and\
disgraceful.\'92\
\
\'91Jane Murdstone,\'92 said her brother, \'91have the goodness not to interrupt\
me. This unhappy boy, Miss Trotwood, has been the occasion of much\
domestic trouble and uneasiness; both during the lifetime of my late\
dear wife, and since. He has a sullen, rebellious spirit; a violent\
temper; and an untoward, intractable disposition. Both my sister and\
myself have endeavoured to correct his vices, but ineffectually. And\
I have felt--we both have felt, I may say; my sister being fully in\
my confidence--that it is right you should receive this grave and\
dispassionate assurance from our lips.\'92\
\
\'91It can hardly be necessary for me to confirm anything stated by my\
brother,\'92 said Miss Murdstone; \'91but I beg to observe, that, of all the\
boys in the world, I believe this is the worst boy.\'92\
\
\'91Strong!\'92 said my aunt, shortly.\
\
\'91But not at all too strong for the facts,\'92 returned Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91Ha!\'92 said my aunt. \'91Well, sir?\'92\
\
\'91I have my own opinions,\'92 resumed Mr. Murdstone, whose face darkened\
more and more, the more he and my aunt observed each other, which they\
did very narrowly, \'91as to the best mode of bringing him up; they are\
founded, in part, on my knowledge of him, and in part on my knowledge of\
my own means and resources. I am responsible for them to myself, I act\
upon them, and I say no more about them. It is enough that I place this\
boy under the eye of a friend of my own, in a respectable business;\
that it does not please him; that he runs away from it; makes himself a\
common vagabond about the country; and comes here, in rags, to appeal\
to you, Miss Trotwood. I wish to set before you, honourably, the exact\
consequences--so far as they are within my knowledge--of your abetting\
him in this appeal.\'92\
\
\'91But about the respectable business first,\'92 said my aunt. \'91If he had\
been your own boy, you would have put him to it, just the same, I\
suppose?\'92\
\
\'91If he had been my brother\'92s own boy,\'92 returned Miss Murdstone, striking\
in, \'91his character, I trust, would have been altogether different.\'92\
\
\'91Or if the poor child, his mother, had been alive, he would still have\
gone into the respectable business, would he?\'92 said my aunt.\
\
\'91I believe,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, with an inclination of his head,\
\'91that Clara would have disputed nothing which myself and my sister Jane\
Murdstone were agreed was for the best.\'92\
\
Miss Murdstone confirmed this with an audible murmur.\
\
\'91Humph!\'92 said my aunt. \'91Unfortunate baby!\'92\
\
Mr. Dick, who had been rattling his money all this time, was rattling it\
so loudly now, that my aunt felt it necessary to check him with a look,\
before saying:\
\
\'91The poor child\'92s annuity died with her?\'92\
\
\'91Died with her,\'92 replied Mr. Murdstone.\
\
\'91And there was no settlement of the little property--the house and\
garden--the what\'92s-its-name Rookery without any rooks in it--upon her\
boy?\'92\
\
\'91It had been left to her, unconditionally, by her first husband,\'92\
Mr. Murdstone began, when my aunt caught him up with the greatest\
irascibility and impatience.\
\
\'91Good Lord, man, there\'92s no occasion to say that. Left to her\
unconditionally! I think I see David Copperfield looking forward to any\
condition of any sort or kind, though it stared him point-blank in the\
face! Of course it was left to her unconditionally. But when she married\
again--when she took that most disastrous step of marrying you, in\
short,\'92 said my aunt, \'91to be plain--did no one put in a word for the boy\
at that time?\'92\
\
\'91My late wife loved her second husband, ma\'92am,\'92 said Mr. Murdstone, \'91and\
trusted implicitly in him.\'92\
\
\'91Your late wife, sir, was a most unworldly, most unhappy, most\
unfortunate baby,\'92 returned my aunt, shaking her head at him. \'91That\'92s\
what she was. And now, what have you got to say next?\'92\
\
\'91Merely this, Miss Trotwood,\'92 he returned. \'91I am here to take David\
back--to take him back unconditionally, to dispose of him as I think\
proper, and to deal with him as I think right. I am not here to make any\
promise, or give any pledge to anybody. You may possibly have some\
idea, Miss Trotwood, of abetting him in his running away, and in his\
complaints to you. Your manner, which I must say does not seem intended\
to propitiate, induces me to think it possible. Now I must caution you\
that if you abet him once, you abet him for good and all; if you step\
in between him and me, now, you must step in, Miss Trotwood, for ever.\
I cannot trifle, or be trifled with. I am here, for the first and last\
time, to take him away. Is he ready to go? If he is not--and you tell me\
he is not; on any pretence; it is indifferent to me what--my doors are\
shut against him henceforth, and yours, I take it for granted, are open\
to him.\'92\
\
To this address, my aunt had listened with the closest attention,\
sitting perfectly upright, with her hands folded on one knee, and\
looking grimly on the speaker. When he had finished, she turned her\
eyes so as to command Miss Murdstone, without otherwise disturbing her\
attitude, and said:\
\
\'91Well, ma\'92am, have YOU got anything to remark?\'92\
\
\'91Indeed, Miss Trotwood,\'92 said Miss Murdstone, \'91all that I could say has\
been so well said by my brother, and all that I know to be the fact\
has been so plainly stated by him, that I have nothing to add except my\
thanks for your politeness. For your very great politeness, I am sure,\'92\
said Miss Murdstone; with an irony which no more affected my aunt, than\
it discomposed the cannon I had slept by at Chatham.\
\
\'91And what does the boy say?\'92 said my aunt. \'91Are you ready to go, David?\'92\
\
I answered no, and entreated her not to let me go. I said that neither\
Mr. nor Miss Murdstone had ever liked me, or had ever been kind to me.\
That they had made my mama, who always loved me dearly, unhappy about\
me, and that I knew it well, and that Peggotty knew it. I said that I\
had been more miserable than I thought anybody could believe, who only\
knew how young I was. And I begged and prayed my aunt--I forget in\
what terms now, but I remember that they affected me very much then--to\
befriend and protect me, for my father\'92s sake.\
\
\'91Mr. Dick,\'92 said my aunt, \'91what shall I do with this child?\'92\
\
Mr. Dick considered, hesitated, brightened, and rejoined, \'91Have him\
measured for a suit of clothes directly.\'92\
\
\'91Mr. Dick,\'92 said my aunt triumphantly, \'91give me your hand, for your\
common sense is invaluable.\'92 Having shaken it with great cordiality, she\
pulled me towards her and said to Mr. Murdstone:\
\
\'91You can go when you like; I\'92ll take my chance with the boy. If he\'92s all\
you say he is, at least I can do as much for him then, as you have done.\
But I don\'92t believe a word of it.\'92\
\
\'91Miss Trotwood,\'92 rejoined Mr. Murdstone, shrugging his shoulders, as he\
rose, \'91if you were a gentleman--\'92\
\
\'91Bah! Stuff and nonsense!\'92 said my aunt. \'91Don\'92t talk to me!\'92\
\
\'91How exquisitely polite!\'92 exclaimed Miss Murdstone, rising.\
\'91Overpowering, really!\'92\
\
\'91Do you think I don\'92t know,\'92 said my aunt, turning a deaf ear to the\
sister, and continuing to address the brother, and to shake her head at\
him with infinite expression, \'91what kind of life you must have led that\
poor, unhappy, misdirected baby? Do you think I don\'92t know what a woeful\
day it was for the soft little creature when you first came in her\
way--smirking and making great eyes at her, I\'92ll be bound, as if you\
couldn\'92t say boh! to a goose!\'92\
\
\'91I never heard anything so elegant!\'92 said Miss Murdstone.\
\
\'91Do you think I can\'92t understand you as well as if I had seen you,\'92\
pursued my aunt, \'91now that I DO see and hear you--which, I tell you\
candidly, is anything but a pleasure to me? Oh yes, bless us! who so\
smooth and silky as Mr. Murdstone at first! The poor, benighted innocent\
had never seen such a man. He was made of sweetness. He worshipped her.\
He doted on her boy--tenderly doted on him! He was to be another father\
to him, and they were all to live together in a garden of roses, weren\'92t\
they? Ugh! Get along with you, do!\'92 said my aunt.\
\
\'91I never heard anything like this person in my life!\'92 exclaimed Miss\
Murdstone.\
\
\'91And when you had made sure of the poor little fool,\'92 said my aunt--\'91God\
forgive me that I should call her so, and she gone where YOU won\'92t go in\
a hurry--because you had not done wrong enough to her and hers, you\
must begin to train her, must you? begin to break her, like a poor\
caged bird, and wear her deluded life away, in teaching her to sing YOUR\
notes?\'92\
\
\'91This is either insanity or intoxication,\'92 said Miss Murdstone, in a\
perfect agony at not being able to turn the current of my aunt\'92s address\
towards herself; \'91and my suspicion is that it\'92s intoxication.\'92\
\
Miss Betsey, without taking the least notice of the interruption,\
continued to address herself to Mr. Murdstone as if there had been no\
such thing.\
\
\'91Mr. Murdstone,\'92 she said, shaking her finger at him, \'91you were a tyrant\
to the simple baby, and you broke her heart. She was a loving baby--I\
know that; I knew it, years before you ever saw her--and through the\
best part of her weakness you gave her the wounds she died of. There\
is the truth for your comfort, however you like it. And you and your\
instruments may make the most of it.\'92\
\
\'91Allow me to inquire, Miss Trotwood,\'92 interposed Miss Murdstone,\
\'91whom you are pleased to call, in a choice of words in which I am not\
experienced, my brother\'92s instruments?\'92\
\
\'91It was clear enough, as I have told you, years before YOU ever saw\
her--and why, in the mysterious dispensations of Providence, you ever\
did see her, is more than humanity can comprehend--it was clear enough\
that the poor soft little thing would marry somebody, at some time or\
other; but I did hope it wouldn\'92t have been as bad as it has turned out.\
That was the time, Mr. Murdstone, when she gave birth to her boy here,\'92\
said my aunt; \'91to the poor child you sometimes tormented her through\
afterwards, which is a disagreeable remembrance and makes the sight of\
him odious now. Aye, aye! you needn\'92t wince!\'92 said my aunt. \'91I know it\'92s\
true without that.\'92\
\
He had stood by the door, all this while, observant of her with a smile\
upon his face, though his black eyebrows were heavily contracted. I\
remarked now, that, though the smile was on his face still, his colour\
had gone in a moment, and he seemed to breathe as if he had been\
running.\
\
\'91Good day, sir,\'92 said my aunt, \'91and good-bye! Good day to you, too,\
ma\'92am,\'92 said my aunt, turning suddenly upon his sister. \'91Let me see you\
ride a donkey over my green again, and as sure as you have a head upon\
your shoulders, I\'92ll knock your bonnet off, and tread upon it!\'92\
\
It would require a painter, and no common painter too, to depict my\
aunt\'92s face as she delivered herself of this very unexpected sentiment,\
and Miss Murdstone\'92s face as she heard it. But the manner of the speech,\
no less than the matter, was so fiery, that Miss Murdstone, without a\
word in answer, discreetly put her arm through her brother\'92s, and walked\
haughtily out of the cottage; my aunt remaining in the window looking\
after them; prepared, I have no doubt, in case of the donkey\'92s\
reappearance, to carry her threat into instant execution.\
\
No attempt at defiance being made, however, her face gradually relaxed,\
and became so pleasant, that I was emboldened to kiss and thank her;\
which I did with great heartiness, and with both my arms clasped round\
her neck. I then shook hands with Mr. Dick, who shook hands with me a\
great many times, and hailed this happy close of the proceedings with\
repeated bursts of laughter.\
\
\'91You\'92ll consider yourself guardian, jointly with me, of this child, Mr.\
Dick,\'92 said my aunt.\
\
\'91I shall be delighted,\'92 said Mr. Dick, \'91to be the guardian of David\'92s\
son.\'92\
\
\'91Very good,\'92 returned my aunt, \'91that\'92s settled. I have been thinking, do\
you know, Mr. Dick, that I might call him Trotwood?\'92\
\
\'91Certainly, certainly. Call him Trotwood, certainly,\'92 said Mr. Dick.\
\'91David\'92s son\'92s Trotwood.\'92\
\
\'91Trotwood Copperfield, you mean,\'92 returned my aunt.\
\
\'91Yes, to be sure. Yes. Trotwood Copperfield,\'92 said Mr. Dick, a little\
abashed.\
\
My aunt took so kindly to the notion, that some ready-made clothes,\
which were purchased for me that afternoon, were marked \'91Trotwood\
Copperfield\'92, in her own handwriting, and in indelible marking-ink,\
before I put them on; and it was settled that all the other clothes\
which were ordered to be made for me (a complete outfit was bespoke that\
afternoon) should be marked in the same way.\
\
Thus I began my new life, in a new name, and with everything new about\
me. Now that the state of doubt was over, I felt, for many days,\
like one in a dream. I never thought that I had a curious couple of\
guardians, in my aunt and Mr. Dick. I never thought of anything about\
myself, distinctly. The two things clearest in my mind were, that a\
remoteness had come upon the old Blunderstone life--which seemed to lie\
in the haze of an immeasurable distance; and that a curtain had for ever\
fallen on my life at Murdstone and Grinby\'92s. No one has ever raised that\
curtain since. I have lifted it for a moment, even in this narrative,\
with a reluctant hand, and dropped it gladly. The remembrance of that\
life is fraught with so much pain to me, with so much mental suffering\
and want of hope, that I have never had the courage even to examine how\
long I was doomed to lead it. Whether it lasted for a year, or more, or\
less, I do not know. I only know that it was, and ceased to be; and that\
I have written, and there I leave it.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 15. I MAKE ANOTHER BEGINNING\
\
\
Mr. Dick and I soon became the best of friends, and very often, when his\
day\'92s work was done, went out together to fly the great kite. Every day\
of his life he had a long sitting at the Memorial, which never made the\
least progress, however hard he laboured, for King Charles the First\
always strayed into it, sooner or later, and then it was thrown aside,\
and another one begun. The patience and hope with which he bore these\
perpetual disappointments, the mild perception he had that there was\
something wrong about King Charles the First, the feeble efforts he made\
to keep him out, and the certainty with which he came in, and tumbled\
the Memorial out of all shape, made a deep impression on me. What Mr.\
Dick supposed would come of the Memorial, if it were completed; where he\
thought it was to go, or what he thought it was to do; he knew no more\
than anybody else, I believe. Nor was it at all necessary that he should\
trouble himself with such questions, for if anything were certain under\
the sun, it was certain that the Memorial never would be finished. It\
was quite an affecting sight, I used to think, to see him with the kite\
when it was up a great height in the air. What he had told me, in his\
room, about his belief in its disseminating the statements pasted on it,\
which were nothing but old leaves of abortive Memorials, might have been\
a fancy with him sometimes; but not when he was out, looking up at\
the kite in the sky, and feeling it pull and tug at his hand. He never\
looked so serene as he did then. I used to fancy, as I sat by him of an\
evening, on a green slope, and saw him watch the kite high in the quiet\
air, that it lifted his mind out of its confusion, and bore it (such was\
my boyish thought) into the skies. As he wound the string in and it came\
lower and lower down out of the beautiful light, until it fluttered to\
the ground, and lay there like a dead thing, he seemed to wake gradually\
out of a dream; and I remember to have seen him take it up, and look\
about him in a lost way, as if they had both come down together, so that\
I pitied him with all my heart.\
\
While I advanced in friendship and intimacy with Mr. Dick, I did not\
go backward in the favour of his staunch friend, my aunt. She took\
so kindly to me, that, in the course of a few weeks, she shortened my\
adopted name of Trotwood into Trot; and even encouraged me to hope, that\
if I went on as I had begun, I might take equal rank in her affections\
with my sister Betsey Trotwood.\
\
\'91Trot,\'92 said my aunt one evening, when the backgammon-board was placed\
as usual for herself and Mr. Dick, \'91we must not forget your education.\'92\
\
This was my only subject of anxiety, and I felt quite delighted by her\
referring to it.\
\
\'91Should you like to go to school at Canterbury?\'92 said my aunt.\
\
I replied that I should like it very much, as it was so near her.\
\
\'91Good,\'92 said my aunt. \'91Should you like to go tomorrow?\'92\
\
Being already no stranger to the general rapidity of my aunt\'92s\
evolutions, I was not surprised by the suddenness of the proposal, and\
said: \'91Yes.\'92\
\
\'91Good,\'92 said my aunt again. \'91Janet, hire the grey pony and chaise\
tomorrow morning at ten o\'92clock, and pack up Master Trotwood\'92s clothes\
tonight.\'92\
\
I was greatly elated by these orders; but my heart smote me for my\
selfishness, when I witnessed their effect on Mr. Dick, who was so\
low-spirited at the prospect of our separation, and played so ill in\
consequence, that my aunt, after giving him several admonitory raps on\
the knuckles with her dice-box, shut up the board, and declined to play\
with him any more. But, on hearing from my aunt that I should sometimes\
come over on a Saturday, and that he could sometimes come and see me\
on a Wednesday, he revived; and vowed to make another kite for those\
occasions, of proportions greatly surpassing the present one. In the\
morning he was downhearted again, and would have sustained himself by\
giving me all the money he had in his possession, gold and silver too,\
if my aunt had not interposed, and limited the gift to five shillings,\
which, at his earnest petition, were afterwards increased to ten. We\
parted at the garden-gate in a most affectionate manner, and Mr. Dick\
did not go into the house until my aunt had driven me out of sight of\
it.\
\
My aunt, who was perfectly indifferent to public opinion, drove the grey\
pony through Dover in a masterly manner; sitting high and stiff like\
a state coachman, keeping a steady eye upon him wherever he went, and\
making a point of not letting him have his own way in any respect. When\
we came into the country road, she permitted him to relax a little,\
however; and looking at me down in a valley of cushion by her side,\
asked me whether I was happy?\
\
\'91Very happy indeed, thank you, aunt,\'92 I said.\
\
She was much gratified; and both her hands being occupied, patted me on\
the head with her whip.\
\
\'91Is it a large school, aunt?\'92 I asked.\
\
\'91Why, I don\'92t know,\'92 said my aunt. \'91We are going to Mr. Wickfield\'92s\
first.\'92\
\
\'91Does he keep a school?\'92 I asked.\
\
\'91No, Trot,\'92 said my aunt. \'91He keeps an office.\'92\
\
I asked for no more information about Mr. Wickfield, as she offered\
none, and we conversed on other subjects until we came to Canterbury,\
where, as it was market-day, my aunt had a great opportunity of\
insinuating the grey pony among carts, baskets, vegetables, and\
huckster\'92s goods. The hair-breadth turns and twists we made, drew down\
upon us a variety of speeches from the people standing about, which\
were not always complimentary; but my aunt drove on with perfect\
indifference, and I dare say would have taken her own way with as much\
coolness through an enemy\'92s country.\
\
At length we stopped before a very old house bulging out over the road;\
a house with long low lattice-windows bulging out still farther, and\
beams with carved heads on the ends bulging out too, so that I fancied\
the whole house was leaning forward, trying to see who was passing on\
the narrow pavement below. It was quite spotless in its cleanliness.\
The old-fashioned brass knocker on the low arched door, ornamented with\
carved garlands of fruit and flowers, twinkled like a star; the two\
stone steps descending to the door were as white as if they had been\
covered with fair linen; and all the angles and corners, and carvings\
and mouldings, and quaint little panes of glass, and quainter little\
windows, though as old as the hills, were as pure as any snow that ever\
fell upon the hills.\
\
When the pony-chaise stopped at the door, and my eyes were intent upon\
the house, I saw a cadaverous face appear at a small window on the\
ground floor (in a little round tower that formed one side of the\
house), and quickly disappear. The low arched door then opened, and\
the face came out. It was quite as cadaverous as it had looked in the\
window, though in the grain of it there was that tinge of red which is\
sometimes to be observed in the skins of red-haired people. It belonged\
to a red-haired person--a youth of fifteen, as I take it now, but\
looking much older--whose hair was cropped as close as the closest\
stubble; who had hardly any eyebrows, and no eyelashes, and eyes of a\
red-brown, so unsheltered and unshaded, that I remember wondering how he\
went to sleep. He was high-shouldered and bony; dressed in decent black,\
with a white wisp of a neckcloth; buttoned up to the throat; and had a\
long, lank, skeleton hand, which particularly attracted my attention, as\
he stood at the pony\'92s head, rubbing his chin with it, and looking up at\
us in the chaise.\
\
\'91Is Mr. Wickfield at home, Uriah Heep?\'92 said my aunt.\
\
\'91Mr. Wickfield\'92s at home, ma\'92am,\'92 said Uriah Heep, \'91if you\'92ll please to\
walk in there\'92--pointing with his long hand to the room he meant.\
\
We got out; and leaving him to hold the pony, went into a long low\
parlour looking towards the street, from the window of which I caught a\
glimpse, as I went in, of Uriah Heep breathing into the pony\'92s nostrils,\
and immediately covering them with his hand, as if he were putting\
some spell upon him. Opposite to the tall old chimney-piece were two\
portraits: one of a gentleman with grey hair (though not by any means\
an old man) and black eyebrows, who was looking over some papers tied\
together with red tape; the other, of a lady, with a very placid and\
sweet expression of face, who was looking at me.\
\
I believe I was turning about in search of Uriah\'92s picture, when, a door\
at the farther end of the room opening, a gentleman entered, at sight of\
whom I turned to the first-mentioned portrait again, to make quite sure\
that it had not come out of its frame. But it was stationary; and as the\
gentleman advanced into the light, I saw that he was some years older\
than when he had had his picture painted.\
\
\'91Miss Betsey Trotwood,\'92 said the gentleman, \'91pray walk in. I was engaged\
for a moment, but you\'92ll excuse my being busy. You know my motive. I\
have but one in life.\'92\
\
Miss Betsey thanked him, and we went into his room, which was furnished\
as an office, with books, papers, tin boxes, and so forth. It looked\
into a garden, and had an iron safe let into the wall; so immediately\
over the mantelshelf, that I wondered, as I sat down, how the sweeps got\
round it when they swept the chimney.\
\
\'91Well, Miss Trotwood,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield; for I soon found that it\
was he, and that he was a lawyer, and steward of the estates of a rich\
gentleman of the county; \'91what wind blows you here? Not an ill wind, I\
hope?\'92\
\
\'91No,\'92 replied my aunt. \'91I have not come for any law.\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s right, ma\'92am,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield. \'91You had better come for\
anything else.\'92 His hair was quite white now, though his eyebrows were\
still black. He had a very agreeable face, and, I thought, was handsome.\
There was a certain richness in his complexion, which I had been long\
accustomed, under Peggotty\'92s tuition, to connect with port wine; and I\
fancied it was in his voice too, and referred his growing corpulency\
to the same cause. He was very cleanly dressed, in a blue coat, striped\
waistcoat, and nankeen trousers; and his fine frilled shirt and cambric\
neckcloth looked unusually soft and white, reminding my strolling fancy\
(I call to mind) of the plumage on the breast of a swan.\
\
\'91This is my nephew,\'92 said my aunt.\
\
\'91Wasn\'92t aware you had one, Miss Trotwood,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield.\
\
\'91My grand-nephew, that is to say,\'92 observed my aunt.\
\
\'91Wasn\'92t aware you had a grand-nephew, I give you my word,\'92 said Mr.\
Wickfield.\
\
\'91I have adopted him,\'92 said my aunt, with a wave of her hand, importing\
that his knowledge and his ignorance were all one to her, \'91and I have\
brought him here, to put to a school where he may be thoroughly well\
taught, and well treated. Now tell me where that school is, and what it\
is, and all about it.\'92\
\
\'91Before I can advise you properly,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield--\'91the old\
question, you know. What\'92s your motive in this?\'92\
\
\'91Deuce take the man!\'92 exclaimed my aunt. \'91Always fishing for motives,\
when they\'92re on the surface! Why, to make the child happy and useful.\'92\
\
\'91It must be a mixed motive, I think,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield, shaking his\
head and smiling incredulously.\
\
\'91A mixed fiddlestick,\'92 returned my aunt. \'91You claim to have one plain\
motive in all you do yourself. You don\'92t suppose, I hope, that you are\
the only plain dealer in the world?\'92\
\
\'91Ay, but I have only one motive in life, Miss Trotwood,\'92 he rejoined,\
smiling. \'91Other people have dozens, scores, hundreds. I have only one.\
There\'92s the difference. However, that\'92s beside the question. The best\
school? Whatever the motive, you want the best?\'92\
\
My aunt nodded assent.\
\
\'91At the best we have,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield, considering, \'91your nephew\
couldn\'92t board just now.\'92\
\
\'91But he could board somewhere else, I suppose?\'92 suggested my aunt.\
\
Mr. Wickfield thought I could. After a little discussion, he proposed to\
take my aunt to the school, that she might see it and judge for herself;\
also, to take her, with the same object, to two or three houses where he\
thought I could be boarded. My aunt embracing the proposal, we were all\
three going out together, when he stopped and said:\
\
\'91Our little friend here might have some motive, perhaps, for objecting\
to the arrangements. I think we had better leave him behind?\'92\
\
My aunt seemed disposed to contest the point; but to facilitate matters\
I said I would gladly remain behind, if they pleased; and returned into\
Mr. Wickfield\'92s office, where I sat down again, in the chair I had first\
occupied, to await their return.\
\
It so happened that this chair was opposite a narrow passage, which\
ended in the little circular room where I had seen Uriah Heep\'92s pale\
face looking out of the window. Uriah, having taken the pony to a\
neighbouring stable, was at work at a desk in this room, which had a\
brass frame on the top to hang paper upon, and on which the writing he\
was making a copy of was then hanging. Though his face was towards me, I\
thought, for some time, the writing being between us, that he could not\
see me; but looking that way more attentively, it made me uncomfortable\
to observe that, every now and then, his sleepless eyes would come below\
the writing, like two red suns, and stealthily stare at me for I dare\
say a whole minute at a time, during which his pen went, or pretended\
to go, as cleverly as ever. I made several attempts to get out of their\
way--such as standing on a chair to look at a map on the other side of\
the room, and poring over the columns of a Kentish newspaper--but they\
always attracted me back again; and whenever I looked towards those two\
red suns, I was sure to find them, either just rising or just setting.\
\
At length, much to my relief, my aunt and Mr. Wickfield came back,\
after a pretty long absence. They were not so successful as I could have\
wished; for though the advantages of the school were undeniable, my aunt\
had not approved of any of the boarding-houses proposed for me.\
\
\'91It\'92s very unfortunate,\'92 said my aunt. \'91I don\'92t know what to do, Trot.\'92\
\
\'91It does happen unfortunately,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield. \'91But I\'92ll tell you\
what you can do, Miss Trotwood.\'92\
\
\'91What\'92s that?\'92 inquired my aunt.\
\
\'91Leave your nephew here, for the present. He\'92s a quiet fellow. He\
won\'92t disturb me at all. It\'92s a capital house for study. As quiet as a\
monastery, and almost as roomy. Leave him here.\'92\
\
My aunt evidently liked the offer, though she was delicate of accepting\
it. So did I. \'91Come, Miss Trotwood,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield. \'91This is the\
way out of the difficulty. It\'92s only a temporary arrangement, you know.\
If it don\'92t act well, or don\'92t quite accord with our mutual convenience,\
he can easily go to the right-about. There will be time to find some\
better place for him in the meanwhile. You had better determine to leave\
him here for the present!\'92\
\
\'91I am very much obliged to you,\'92 said my aunt; \'91and so is he, I see;\
but--\'92\
\
\'91Come! I know what you mean,\'92 cried Mr. Wickfield. \'91You shall not be\
oppressed by the receipt of favours, Miss Trotwood. You may pay for\
him, if you like. We won\'92t be hard about terms, but you shall pay if you\
will.\'92\
\
\'91On that understanding,\'92 said my aunt, \'91though it doesn\'92t lessen the\
real obligation, I shall be very glad to leave him.\'92\
\
\'91Then come and see my little housekeeper,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield.\
\
We accordingly went up a wonderful old staircase; with a balustrade\
so broad that we might have gone up that, almost as easily; and into\
a shady old drawing-room, lighted by some three or four of the quaint\
windows I had looked up at from the street: which had old oak seats\
in them, that seemed to have come of the same trees as the shining oak\
floor, and the great beams in the ceiling. It was a prettily furnished\
room, with a piano and some lively furniture in red and green, and some\
flowers. It seemed to be all old nooks and corners; and in every nook\
and corner there was some queer little table, or cupboard, or bookcase,\
or seat, or something or other, that made me think there was not such\
another good corner in the room; until I looked at the next one, and\
found it equal to it, if not better. On everything there was the same\
air of retirement and cleanliness that marked the house outside.\
\
Mr. Wickfield tapped at a door in a corner of the panelled wall, and a\
girl of about my own age came quickly out and kissed him. On her face,\
I saw immediately the placid and sweet expression of the lady whose\
picture had looked at me downstairs. It seemed to my imagination as\
if the portrait had grown womanly, and the original remained a child.\
Although her face was quite bright and happy, there was a tranquillity\
about it, and about her--a quiet, good, calm spirit--that I never have\
forgotten; that I shall never forget. This was his little housekeeper,\
his daughter Agnes, Mr. Wickfield said. When I heard how he said it, and\
saw how he held her hand, I guessed what the one motive of his life was.\
\
She had a little basket-trifle hanging at her side, with keys in it; and\
she looked as staid and as discreet a housekeeper as the old house\
could have. She listened to her father as he told her about me, with a\
pleasant face; and when he had concluded, proposed to my aunt that we\
should go upstairs and see my room. We all went together, she before us:\
and a glorious old room it was, with more oak beams, and diamond panes;\
and the broad balustrade going all the way up to it.\
\
I cannot call to mind where or when, in my childhood, I had seen a\
stained glass window in a church. Nor do I recollect its subject. But\
I know that when I saw her turn round, in the grave light of the old\
staircase, and wait for us, above, I thought of that window; and I\
associated something of its tranquil brightness with Agnes Wickfield\
ever afterwards.\
\
My aunt was as happy as I was, in the arrangement made for me; and we\
went down to the drawing-room again, well pleased and gratified. As she\
would not hear of staying to dinner, lest she should by any chance fail\
to arrive at home with the grey pony before dark; and as I apprehend Mr.\
Wickfield knew her too well to argue any point with her; some lunch was\
provided for her there, and Agnes went back to her governess, and Mr.\
Wickfield to his office. So we were left to take leave of one another\
without any restraint.\
\
She told me that everything would be arranged for me by Mr. Wickfield,\
and that I should want for nothing, and gave me the kindest words and\
the best advice.\
\
\'91Trot,\'92 said my aunt in conclusion, \'91be a credit to yourself, to me, and\
Mr. Dick, and Heaven be with you!\'92\
\
I was greatly overcome, and could only thank her, again and again, and\
send my love to Mr. Dick.\
\
\'91Never,\'92 said my aunt, \'91be mean in anything; never be false; never be\
cruel. Avoid those three vices, Trot, and I can always be hopeful of\
you.\'92\
\
I promised, as well as I could, that I would not abuse her kindness or\
forget her admonition.\
\
\'91The pony\'92s at the door,\'92 said my aunt, \'91and I am off! Stay here.\'92 With\
these words she embraced me hastily, and went out of the room, shutting\
the door after her. At first I was startled by so abrupt a departure,\
and almost feared I had displeased her; but when I looked into the\
street, and saw how dejectedly she got into the chaise, and drove away\
without looking up, I understood her better and did not do her that\
injustice.\
\
By five o\'92clock, which was Mr. Wickfield\'92s dinner-hour, I had mustered\
up my spirits again, and was ready for my knife and fork. The cloth was\
only laid for us two; but Agnes was waiting in the drawing-room before\
dinner, went down with her father, and sat opposite to him at table. I\
doubted whether he could have dined without her.\
\
We did not stay there, after dinner, but came upstairs into the\
drawing-room again: in one snug corner of which, Agnes set glasses for\
her father, and a decanter of port wine. I thought he would have missed\
its usual flavour, if it had been put there for him by any other hands.\
\
There he sat, taking his wine, and taking a good deal of it, for two\
hours; while Agnes played on the piano, worked, and talked to him and\
me. He was, for the most part, gay and cheerful with us; but sometimes\
his eyes rested on her, and he fell into a brooding state, and was\
silent. She always observed this quickly, I thought, and always roused\
him with a question or caress. Then he came out of his meditation, and\
drank more wine.\
\
Agnes made the tea, and presided over it; and the time passed away after\
it, as after dinner, until she went to bed; when her father took her\
in his arms and kissed her, and, she being gone, ordered candles in his\
office. Then I went to bed too.\
\
But in the course of the evening I had rambled down to the door, and a\
little way along the street, that I might have another peep at the old\
houses, and the grey Cathedral; and might think of my coming through\
that old city on my journey, and of my passing the very house I lived\
in, without knowing it. As I came back, I saw Uriah Heep shutting up\
the office; and feeling friendly towards everybody, went in and spoke\
to him, and at parting, gave him my hand. But oh, what a clammy hand his\
was! as ghostly to the touch as to the sight! I rubbed mine afterwards,\
to warm it, AND TO RUB HIS OFF.\
\
It was such an uncomfortable hand, that, when I went to my room, it was\
still cold and wet upon my memory. Leaning out of the window, and seeing\
one of the faces on the beam-ends looking at me sideways, I fancied it\
was Uriah Heep got up there somehow, and shut him out in a hurry.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 16. I AM A NEW BOY IN MORE SENSES THAN ONE\
\
\
Next morning, after breakfast, I entered on school life again. I went,\
accompanied by Mr. Wickfield, to the scene of my future studies--a grave\
building in a courtyard, with a learned air about it that seemed very\
well suited to the stray rooks and jackdaws who came down from the\
Cathedral towers to walk with a clerkly bearing on the grass-plot--and\
was introduced to my new master, Doctor Strong.\
\
Doctor Strong looked almost as rusty, to my thinking, as the tall iron\
rails and gates outside the house; and almost as stiff and heavy as the\
great stone urns that flanked them, and were set up, on the top of\
the red-brick wall, at regular distances all round the court, like\
sublimated skittles, for Time to play at. He was in his library (I mean\
Doctor Strong was), with his clothes not particularly well brushed, and\
his hair not particularly well combed; his knee-smalls unbraced; his\
long black gaiters unbuttoned; and his shoes yawning like two caverns on\
the hearth-rug. Turning upon me a lustreless eye, that reminded me of\
a long-forgotten blind old horse who once used to crop the grass, and\
tumble over the graves, in Blunderstone churchyard, he said he was glad\
to see me: and then he gave me his hand; which I didn\'92t know what to do\
with, as it did nothing for itself.\
\
But, sitting at work, not far from Doctor Strong, was a very pretty\
young lady--whom he called Annie, and who was his daughter, I\
supposed--who got me out of my difficulty by kneeling down to put Doctor\
Strong\'92s shoes on, and button his gaiters, which she did with great\
cheerfulness and quickness. When she had finished, and we were going\
out to the schoolroom, I was much surprised to hear Mr. Wickfield,\
in bidding her good morning, address her as \'91Mrs. Strong\'92; and I was\
wondering could she be Doctor Strong\'92s son\'92s wife, or could she be Mrs.\
Doctor Strong, when Doctor Strong himself unconsciously enlightened me.\
\
\'91By the by, Wickfield,\'92 he said, stopping in a passage with his hand on\
my shoulder; \'91you have not found any suitable provision for my wife\'92s\
cousin yet?\'92\
\
\'91No,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield. \'91No. Not yet.\'92\
\
\'91I could wish it done as soon as it can be done, Wickfield,\'92 said\
Doctor Strong, \'91for Jack Maldon is needy, and idle; and of those two\
bad things, worse things sometimes come. What does Doctor Watts say,\'92 he\
added, looking at me, and moving his head to the time of his quotation,\
\'91\'93Satan finds some mischief still, for idle hands to do.\'94\'92\
\
\'91Egad, Doctor,\'92 returned Mr. Wickfield, \'91if Doctor Watts knew mankind,\
he might have written, with as much truth, \'93Satan finds some mischief\
still, for busy hands to do.\'94 The busy people achieve their full share\
of mischief in the world, you may rely upon it. What have the people\
been about, who have been the busiest in getting money, and in getting\
power, this century or two? No mischief?\'92\
\
\'91Jack Maldon will never be very busy in getting either, I expect,\'92 said\
Doctor Strong, rubbing his chin thoughtfully.\
\
\'91Perhaps not,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield; \'91and you bring me back to the\
question, with an apology for digressing. No, I have not been able\
to dispose of Mr. Jack Maldon yet. I believe,\'92 he said this with some\
hesitation, \'91I penetrate your motive, and it makes the thing more\
difficult.\'92\
\
\'91My motive,\'92 returned Doctor Strong, \'91is to make some suitable provision\
for a cousin, and an old playfellow, of Annie\'92s.\'92\
\
\'91Yes, I know,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield; \'91at home or abroad.\'92\
\
\'91Aye!\'92 replied the Doctor, apparently wondering why he emphasized those\
words so much. \'91At home or abroad.\'92\
\
\'91Your own expression, you know,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield. \'91Or abroad.\'92\
\
\'91Surely,\'92 the Doctor answered. \'91Surely. One or other.\'92\
\
\'91One or other? Have you no choice?\'92 asked Mr. Wickfield.\
\
\'91No,\'92 returned the Doctor.\
\
\'91No?\'92 with astonishment.\
\
\'91Not the least.\'92\
\
\'91No motive,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield, \'91for meaning abroad, and not at home?\'92\
\
\'91No,\'92 returned the Doctor.\
\
\'91I am bound to believe you, and of course I do believe you,\'92 said Mr.\
Wickfield. \'91It might have simplified my office very much, if I had known\
it before. But I confess I entertained another impression.\'92\
\
Doctor Strong regarded him with a puzzled and doubting look,\
which almost immediately subsided into a smile that gave me great\
encouragement; for it was full of amiability and sweetness, and there\
was a simplicity in it, and indeed in his whole manner, when the\
studious, pondering frost upon it was got through, very attractive and\
hopeful to a young scholar like me. Repeating \'91no\'92, and \'91not the least\'92,\
and other short assurances to the same purport, Doctor Strong jogged\
on before us, at a queer, uneven pace; and we followed: Mr. Wickfield,\
looking grave, I observed, and shaking his head to himself, without\
knowing that I saw him.\
\
The schoolroom was a pretty large hall, on the quietest side of the\
house, confronted by the stately stare of some half-dozen of the great\
urns, and commanding a peep of an old secluded garden belonging to the\
Doctor, where the peaches were ripening on the sunny south wall. There\
were two great aloes, in tubs, on the turf outside the windows; the\
broad hard leaves of which plant (looking as if they were made of\
painted tin) have ever since, by association, been symbolical to me\
of silence and retirement. About five-and-twenty boys were studiously\
engaged at their books when we went in, but they rose to give the Doctor\
good morning, and remained standing when they saw Mr. Wickfield and me.\
\
\'91A new boy, young gentlemen,\'92 said the Doctor; \'91Trotwood Copperfield.\'92\
\
One Adams, who was the head-boy, then stepped out of his place and\
welcomed me. He looked like a young clergyman, in his white cravat, but\
he was very affable and good-humoured; and he showed me my place, and\
presented me to the masters, in a gentlemanly way that would have put me\
at my ease, if anything could.\
\
It seemed to me so long, however, since I had been among such boys,\
or among any companions of my own age, except Mick Walker and Mealy\
Potatoes, that I felt as strange as ever I have done in my life. I was\
so conscious of having passed through scenes of which they could have\
no knowledge, and of having acquired experiences foreign to my age,\
appearance, and condition as one of them, that I half believed it was an\
imposture to come there as an ordinary little schoolboy. I had become,\
in the Murdstone and Grinby time, however short or long it may have\
been, so unused to the sports and games of boys, that I knew I was\
awkward and inexperienced in the commonest things belonging to them.\
Whatever I had learnt, had so slipped away from me in the sordid cares\
of my life from day to night, that now, when I was examined about what\
I knew, I knew nothing, and was put into the lowest form of the school.\
But, troubled as I was, by my want of boyish skill, and of book-learning\
too, I was made infinitely more uncomfortable by the consideration,\
that, in what I did know, I was much farther removed from my companions\
than in what I did not. My mind ran upon what they would think, if they\
knew of my familiar acquaintance with the King\'92s Bench Prison? Was there\
anything about me which would reveal my proceedings in connexion with\
the Micawber family--all those pawnings, and sellings, and suppers--in\
spite of myself? Suppose some of the boys had seen me coming through\
Canterbury, wayworn and ragged, and should find me out? What would they\
say, who made so light of money, if they could know how I had scraped my\
halfpence together, for the purchase of my daily saveloy and beer, or\
my slices of pudding? How would it affect them, who were so innocent of\
London life, and London streets, to discover how knowing I was (and was\
ashamed to be) in some of the meanest phases of both? All this ran in\
my head so much, on that first day at Doctor Strong\'92s, that I felt\
distrustful of my slightest look and gesture; shrunk within myself\
whensoever I was approached by one of my new schoolfellows; and hurried\
off the minute school was over, afraid of committing myself in my\
response to any friendly notice or advance.\
\
But there was such an influence in Mr. Wickfield\'92s old house, that when\
I knocked at it, with my new school-books under my arm, I began to feel\
my uneasiness softening away. As I went up to my airy old room, the\
grave shadow of the staircase seemed to fall upon my doubts and fears,\
and to make the past more indistinct. I sat there, sturdily conning my\
books, until dinner-time (we were out of school for good at three); and\
went down, hopeful of becoming a passable sort of boy yet.\
\
Agnes was in the drawing-room, waiting for her father, who was detained\
by someone in his office. She met me with her pleasant smile, and asked\
me how I liked the school. I told her I should like it very much, I\
hoped; but I was a little strange to it at first.\
\
\'91You have never been to school,\'92 I said, \'91have you?\'92 \'91Oh yes! Every\
day.\'92\
\
\'91Ah, but you mean here, at your own home?\'92\
\
\'91Papa couldn\'92t spare me to go anywhere else,\'92 she answered, smiling and\
shaking her head. \'91His housekeeper must be in his house, you know.\'92\
\
\'91He is very fond of you, I am sure,\'92 I said.\
\
She nodded \'91Yes,\'92 and went to the door to listen for his coming up, that\
she might meet him on the stairs. But, as he was not there, she came\
back again.\
\
\'91Mama has been dead ever since I was born,\'92 she said, in her quiet way.\
\'91I only know her picture, downstairs. I saw you looking at it yesterday.\
Did you think whose it was?\'92\
\
I told her yes, because it was so like herself.\
\
\'91Papa says so, too,\'92 said Agnes, pleased. \'91Hark! That\'92s papa now!\'92\
\
Her bright calm face lighted up with pleasure as she went to meet him,\
and as they came in, hand in hand. He greeted me cordially; and told\
me I should certainly be happy under Doctor Strong, who was one of the\
gentlest of men.\
\
\'91There may be some, perhaps--I don\'92t know that there are--who abuse\
his kindness,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield. \'91Never be one of those, Trotwood, in\
anything. He is the least suspicious of mankind; and whether that\'92s\
a merit, or whether it\'92s a blemish, it deserves consideration in all\
dealings with the Doctor, great or small.\'92\
\
He spoke, I thought, as if he were weary, or dissatisfied with\
something; but I did not pursue the question in my mind, for dinner was\
just then announced, and we went down and took the same seats as before.\
\
We had scarcely done so, when Uriah Heep put in his red head and his\
lank hand at the door, and said:\
\
\'91Here\'92s Mr. Maldon begs the favour of a word, sir.\'92\
\
\'91I am but this moment quit of Mr. Maldon,\'92 said his master.\
\
\'91Yes, sir,\'92 returned Uriah; \'91but Mr. Maldon has come back, and he begs\
the favour of a word.\'92\
\
As he held the door open with his hand, Uriah looked at me, and looked\
at Agnes, and looked at the dishes, and looked at the plates, and looked\
at every object in the room, I thought,--yet seemed to look at nothing;\
he made such an appearance all the while of keeping his red eyes\
dutifully on his master. \'91I beg your pardon. It\'92s only to say, on\
reflection,\'92 observed a voice behind Uriah, as Uriah\'92s head was\
pushed away, and the speaker\'92s substituted--\'91pray excuse me for this\
intrusion--that as it seems I have no choice in the matter, the sooner\
I go abroad the better. My cousin Annie did say, when we talked of it,\
that she liked to have her friends within reach rather than to have them\
banished, and the old Doctor--\'92\
\
\'91Doctor Strong, was that?\'92 Mr. Wickfield interposed, gravely.\
\
\'91Doctor Strong, of course,\'92 returned the other; \'91I call him the old\
Doctor; it\'92s all the same, you know.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know,\'92 returned Mr. Wickfield.\
\
\'91Well, Doctor Strong,\'92 said the other--\'91Doctor Strong was of the same\
mind, I believed. But as it appears from the course you take with me he\
has changed his mind, why there\'92s no more to be said, except that the\
sooner I am off, the better. Therefore, I thought I\'92d come back and say,\
that the sooner I am off the better. When a plunge is to be made into\
the water, it\'92s of no use lingering on the bank.\'92\
\
\'91There shall be as little lingering as possible, in your case, Mr.\
Maldon, you may depend upon it,\'92 said Mr. Wickfield.\
\
\'91Thank\'92ee,\'92 said the other. \'91Much obliged. I don\'92t want to look a\
gift-horse in the mouth, which is not a gracious thing to do; otherwise,\
I dare say, my cousin Annie could easily arrange it in her own way. I\
suppose Annie would only have to say to the old Doctor--\'92\
\
\'91Meaning that Mrs. Strong would only have to say to her husband--do I\
follow you?\'92 said Mr. Wickfield.\
\
\'91Quite so,\'92 returned the other, \'91--would only have to say, that she\
wanted such and such a thing to be so and so; and it would be so and so,\
as a matter of course.\'92\
\
\'91And why as a matter of course, Mr. Maldon?\'92 asked Mr. Wickfield,\
sedately eating his dinner.\
\
\'91Why, because Annie\'92s a charming young girl, and the old Doctor--Doctor\
Strong, I mean--is not quite a charming young boy,\'92 said Mr. Jack\
Maldon, laughing. \'91No offence to anybody, Mr. Wickfield. I only mean\
that I suppose some compensation is fair and reasonable in that sort of\
marriage.\'92\
\
\'91Compensation to the lady, sir?\'92 asked Mr. Wickfield gravely.\
\
\'91To the lady, sir,\'92 Mr. Jack Maldon answered, laughing. But appearing\
to remark that Mr. Wickfield went on with his dinner in the same sedate,\
immovable manner, and that there was no hope of making him relax a\
muscle of his face, he added: \'91However, I have said what I came to say,\
and, with another apology for this intrusion, I may take myself off. Of\
course I shall observe your directions, in considering the matter as one\
to be arranged between you and me solely, and not to be referred to, up\
at the Doctor\'92s.\'92\
\
\'91Have you dined?\'92 asked Mr. Wickfield, with a motion of his hand towards\
the table.\
\
\'91Thank\'92ee. I am going to dine,\'92 said Mr. Maldon, \'91with my cousin Annie.\
Good-bye!\'92\
\
Mr. Wickfield, without rising, looked after him thoughtfully as he went\
out. He was rather a shallow sort of young gentleman, I thought, with\
a handsome face, a rapid utterance, and a confident, bold air. And this\
was the first I ever saw of Mr. Jack Maldon; whom I had not expected to\
see so soon, when I heard the Doctor speak of him that morning.\
\
When we had dined, we went upstairs again, where everything went on\
exactly as on the previous day. Agnes set the glasses and decanters in\
the same corner, and Mr. Wickfield sat down to drink, and drank a good\
deal. Agnes played the piano to him, sat by him, and worked and talked,\
and played some games at dominoes with me. In good time she made tea;\
and afterwards, when I brought down my books, looked into them, and\
showed me what she knew of them (which was no slight matter, though she\
said it was), and what was the best way to learn and understand them.\
I see her, with her modest, orderly, placid manner, and I hear her\
beautiful calm voice, as I write these words. The influence for all\
good, which she came to exercise over me at a later time, begins\
already to descend upon my breast. I love little Em\'92ly, and I don\'92t love\
Agnes--no, not at all in that way--but I feel that there are goodness,\
peace, and truth, wherever Agnes is; and that the soft light of the\
coloured window in the church, seen long ago, falls on her always, and\
on me when I am near her, and on everything around.\
\
The time having come for her withdrawal for the night, and she having\
left us, I gave Mr. Wickfield my hand, preparatory to going away myself.\
But he checked me and said: \'91Should you like to stay with us, Trotwood,\
or to go elsewhere?\'92\
\
\'91To stay,\'92 I answered, quickly.\
\
\'91You are sure?\'92\
\
\'91If you please. If I may!\'92\
\
\'91Why, it\'92s but a dull life that we lead here, boy, I am afraid,\'92 he\
said.\
\
\'91Not more dull for me than Agnes, sir. Not dull at all!\'92\
\
\'91Than Agnes,\'92 he repeated, walking slowly to the great chimney-piece,\
and leaning against it. \'91Than Agnes!\'92\
\
He had drank wine that evening (or I fancied it), until his eyes were\
bloodshot. Not that I could see them now, for they were cast down, and\
shaded by his hand; but I had noticed them a little while before.\
\
\'91Now I wonder,\'92 he muttered, \'91whether my Agnes tires of me. When should\
I ever tire of her! But that\'92s different, that\'92s quite different.\'92\
\
He was musing, not speaking to me; so I remained quiet.\
\
\'91A dull old house,\'92 he said, \'91and a monotonous life; but I must have\
her near me. I must keep her near me. If the thought that I may die and\
leave my darling, or that my darling may die and leave me, comes like a\
spectre, to distress my happiest hours, and is only to be drowned in--\'92\
\
He did not supply the word; but pacing slowly to the place where he had\
sat, and mechanically going through the action of pouring wine from the\
empty decanter, set it down and paced back again.\
\
\'91If it is miserable to bear, when she is here,\'92 he said, \'91what would it\
be, and she away? No, no, no. I cannot try that.\'92\
\
He leaned against the chimney-piece, brooding so long that I could not\
decide whether to run the risk of disturbing him by going, or to remain\
quietly where I was, until he should come out of his reverie. At length\
he aroused himself, and looked about the room until his eyes encountered\
mine.\
\
\'91Stay with us, Trotwood, eh?\'92 he said in his usual manner, and as if\
he were answering something I had just said. \'91I am glad of it. You are\
company to us both. It is wholesome to have you here. Wholesome for me,\
wholesome for Agnes, wholesome perhaps for all of us.\'92\
\
\'91I am sure it is for me, sir,\'92 I said. \'91I am so glad to be here.\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s a fine fellow!\'92 said Mr. Wickfield. \'91As long as you are glad\
to be here, you shall stay here.\'92 He shook hands with me upon it, and\
clapped me on the back; and told me that when I had anything to do\
at night after Agnes had left us, or when I wished to read for my own\
pleasure, I was free to come down to his room, if he were there and if\
I desired it for company\'92s sake, and to sit with him. I thanked him for\
his consideration; and, as he went down soon afterwards, and I was\
not tired, went down too, with a book in my hand, to avail myself, for\
half-an-hour, of his permission.\
\
But, seeing a light in the little round office, and immediately feeling\
myself attracted towards Uriah Heep, who had a sort of fascination for\
me, I went in there instead. I found Uriah reading a great fat book,\
with such demonstrative attention, that his lank forefinger followed up\
every line as he read, and made clammy tracks along the page (or so I\
fully believed) like a snail.\
\
\'91You are working late tonight, Uriah,\'92 says I.\
\
\'91Yes, Master Copperfield,\'92 says Uriah.\
\
As I was getting on the stool opposite, to talk to him more\
conveniently, I observed that he had not such a thing as a smile about\
him, and that he could only widen his mouth and make two hard creases\
down his cheeks, one on each side, to stand for one.\
\
\'91I am not doing office-work, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah.\
\
\'91What work, then?\'92 I asked.\
\
\'91I am improving my legal knowledge, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah. \'91I\
am going through Tidd\'92s Practice. Oh, what a writer Mr. Tidd is, Master\
Copperfield!\'92\
\
My stool was such a tower of observation, that as I watched him reading\
on again, after this rapturous exclamation, and following up the lines\
with his forefinger, I observed that his nostrils, which were thin and\
pointed, with sharp dints in them, had a singular and most uncomfortable\
way of expanding and contracting themselves--that they seemed to twinkle\
instead of his eyes, which hardly ever twinkled at all.\
\
\'91I suppose you are quite a great lawyer?\'92 I said, after looking at him\
for some time.\
\
\'91Me, Master Copperfield?\'92 said Uriah. \'91Oh, no! I\'92m a very umble person.\'92\
\
It was no fancy of mine about his hands, I observed; for he frequently\
ground the palms against each other as if to squeeze them dry and\
warm, besides often wiping them, in a stealthy way, on his\
pocket-handkerchief.\
\
\'91I am well aware that I am the umblest person going,\'92 said Uriah Heep,\
modestly; \'91let the other be where he may. My mother is likewise a very\
umble person. We live in a numble abode, Master Copperfield, but have\
much to be thankful for. My father\'92s former calling was umble. He was a\
sexton.\'92\
\
\'91What is he now?\'92 I asked.\
\
\'91He is a partaker of glory at present, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah\
Heep. \'91But we have much to be thankful for. How much have I to be\
thankful for in living with Mr. Wickfield!\'92\
\
I asked Uriah if he had been with Mr. Wickfield long?\
\
\'91I have been with him, going on four year, Master Copperfield,\'92 said\
Uriah; shutting up his book, after carefully marking the place where he\
had left off. \'91Since a year after my father\'92s death. How much have I\
to be thankful for, in that! How much have I to be thankful for, in Mr.\
Wickfield\'92s kind intention to give me my articles, which would otherwise\
not lay within the umble means of mother and self!\'92\
\
\'91Then, when your articled time is over, you\'92ll be a regular lawyer, I\
suppose?\'92 said I.\
\
\'91With the blessing of Providence, Master Copperfield,\'92 returned Uriah.\
\
\'91Perhaps you\'92ll be a partner in Mr. Wickfield\'92s business, one of these\
days,\'92 I said, to make myself agreeable; \'91and it will be Wickfield and\
Heep, or Heep late Wickfield.\'92\
\
\'91Oh no, Master Copperfield,\'92 returned Uriah, shaking his head, \'91I am\
much too umble for that!\'92\
\
He certainly did look uncommonly like the carved face on the beam\
outside my window, as he sat, in his humility, eyeing me sideways, with\
his mouth widened, and the creases in his cheeks.\
\
\'91Mr. Wickfield is a most excellent man, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah.\
\'91If you have known him long, you know it, I am sure, much better than I\
can inform you.\'92\
\
I replied that I was certain he was; but that I had not known him long\
myself, though he was a friend of my aunt\'92s.\
\
\'91Oh, indeed, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah. \'91Your aunt is a sweet\
lady, Master Copperfield!\'92\
\
He had a way of writhing when he wanted to express enthusiasm, which was\
very ugly; and which diverted my attention from the compliment he had\
paid my relation, to the snaky twistings of his throat and body.\
\
\'91A sweet lady, Master Copperfield!\'92 said Uriah Heep. \'91She has a great\
admiration for Miss Agnes, Master Copperfield, I believe?\'92\
\
I said, \'91Yes,\'92 boldly; not that I knew anything about it, Heaven forgive\
me!\
\
\'91I hope you have, too, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah. \'91But I am sure\
you must have.\'92\
\
\'91Everybody must have,\'92 I returned.\
\
\'91Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah Heep, \'91for that remark!\
It is so true! Umble as I am, I know it is so true! Oh, thank you,\
Master Copperfield!\'92 He writhed himself quite off his stool in the\
excitement of his feelings, and, being off, began to make arrangements\
for going home.\
\
\'91Mother will be expecting me,\'92 he said, referring to a pale,\
inexpressive-faced watch in his pocket, \'91and getting uneasy; for though\
we are very umble, Master Copperfield, we are much attached to one\
another. If you would come and see us, any afternoon, and take a cup of\
tea at our lowly dwelling, mother would be as proud of your company as I\
should be.\'92\
\
I said I should be glad to come.\
\
\'91Thank you, Master Copperfield,\'92 returned Uriah, putting his book\
away upon the shelf--\'91I suppose you stop here, some time, Master\
Copperfield?\'92\
\
I said I was going to be brought up there, I believed, as long as I\
remained at school.\
\
\'91Oh, indeed!\'92 exclaimed Uriah. \'91I should think YOU would come into the\
business at last, Master Copperfield!\'92\
\
I protested that I had no views of that sort, and that no such scheme\
was entertained in my behalf by anybody; but Uriah insisted on blandly\
replying to all my assurances, \'91Oh, yes, Master Copperfield, I should\
think you would, indeed!\'92 and, \'91Oh, indeed, Master Copperfield, I should\
think you would, certainly!\'92 over and over again. Being, at last, ready\
to leave the office for the night, he asked me if it would suit my\
convenience to have the light put out; and on my answering \'91Yes,\'92\
instantly extinguished it. After shaking hands with me--his hand felt\
like a fish, in the dark--he opened the door into the street a very\
little, and crept out, and shut it, leaving me to grope my way back into\
the house: which cost me some trouble and a fall over his stool. This\
was the proximate cause, I suppose, of my dreaming about him, for what\
appeared to me to be half the night; and dreaming, among other things,\
that he had launched Mr. Peggotty\'92s house on a piratical expedition,\
with a black flag at the masthead, bearing the inscription \'91Tidd\'92s\
Practice\'92, under which diabolical ensign he was carrying me and little\
Em\'92ly to the Spanish Main, to be drowned.\
\
I got a little the better of my uneasiness when I went to school\
next day, and a good deal the better next day, and so shook it off by\
degrees, that in less than a fortnight I was quite at home, and happy,\
among my new companions. I was awkward enough in their games, and\
backward enough in their studies; but custom would improve me in the\
first respect, I hoped, and hard work in the second. Accordingly, I\
went to work very hard, both in play and in earnest, and gained great\
commendation. And, in a very little while, the Murdstone and Grinby life\
became so strange to me that I hardly believed in it, while my present\
life grew so familiar, that I seemed to have been leading it a long\
time.\
\
Doctor Strong\'92s was an excellent school; as different from Mr. Creakle\'92s\
as good is from evil. It was very gravely and decorously ordered, and\
on a sound system; with an appeal, in everything, to the honour and good\
faith of the boys, and an avowed intention to rely on their possession\
of those qualities unless they proved themselves unworthy of it, which\
worked wonders. We all felt that we had a part in the management of\
the place, and in sustaining its character and dignity. Hence, we soon\
became warmly attached to it--I am sure I did for one, and I never knew,\
in all my time, of any other boy being otherwise--and learnt with a good\
will, desiring to do it credit. We had noble games out of hours, and\
plenty of liberty; but even then, as I remember, we were well spoken of\
in the town, and rarely did any disgrace, by our appearance or manner,\
to the reputation of Doctor Strong and Doctor Strong\'92s boys.\
\
Some of the higher scholars boarded in the Doctor\'92s house, and through\
them I learned, at second hand, some particulars of the Doctor\'92s\
history--as, how he had not yet been married twelve months to the\
beautiful young lady I had seen in the study, whom he had married for\
love; for she had not a sixpence, and had a world of poor relations (so\
our fellows said) ready to swarm the Doctor out of house and home. Also,\
how the Doctor\'92s cogitating manner was attributable to his being always\
engaged in looking out for Greek roots; which, in my innocence and\
ignorance, I supposed to be a botanical furor on the Doctor\'92s part,\
especially as he always looked at the ground when he walked about,\
until I understood that they were roots of words, with a view to a new\
Dictionary which he had in contemplation. Adams, our head-boy, who had\
a turn for mathematics, had made a calculation, I was informed, of the\
time this Dictionary would take in completing, on the Doctor\'92s plan, and\
at the Doctor\'92s rate of going. He considered that it might be done\
in one thousand six hundred and forty-nine years, counting from the\
Doctor\'92s last, or sixty-second, birthday.\
\
But the Doctor himself was the idol of the whole school: and it must\
have been a badly composed school if he had been anything else, for\
he was the kindest of men; with a simple faith in him that might have\
touched the stone hearts of the very urns upon the wall. As he walked up\
and down that part of the courtyard which was at the side of the house,\
with the stray rooks and jackdaws looking after him with their heads\
cocked slyly, as if they knew how much more knowing they were in worldly\
affairs than he, if any sort of vagabond could only get near enough to\
his creaking shoes to attract his attention to one sentence of a tale\
of distress, that vagabond was made for the next two days. It was so\
notorious in the house, that the masters and head-boys took pains to cut\
these marauders off at angles, and to get out of windows, and turn them\
out of the courtyard, before they could make the Doctor aware of their\
presence; which was sometimes happily effected within a few yards of\
him, without his knowing anything of the matter, as he jogged to and\
fro. Outside his own domain, and unprotected, he was a very sheep for\
the shearers. He would have taken his gaiters off his legs, to give\
away. In fact, there was a story current among us (I have no idea, and\
never had, on what authority, but I have believed it for so many\
years that I feel quite certain it is true), that on a frosty day, one\
winter-time, he actually did bestow his gaiters on a beggar-woman, who\
occasioned some scandal in the neighbourhood by exhibiting a fine infant\
from door to door, wrapped in those garments, which were universally\
recognized, being as well known in the vicinity as the Cathedral. The\
legend added that the only person who did not identify them was the\
Doctor himself, who, when they were shortly afterwards displayed at the\
door of a little second-hand shop of no very good repute, where such\
things were taken in exchange for gin, was more than once observed to\
handle them approvingly, as if admiring some curious novelty in the\
pattern, and considering them an improvement on his own.\
\
It was very pleasant to see the Doctor with his pretty young wife. He\
had a fatherly, benignant way of showing his fondness for her, which\
seemed in itself to express a good man. I often saw them walking in the\
garden where the peaches were, and I sometimes had a nearer observation\
of them in the study or the parlour. She appeared to me to take great\
care of the Doctor, and to like him very much, though I never thought\
her vitally interested in the Dictionary: some cumbrous fragments of\
which work the Doctor always carried in his pockets, and in the lining\
of his hat, and generally seemed to be expounding to her as they walked\
about.\
\
I saw a good deal of Mrs. Strong, both because she had taken a liking\
for me on the morning of my introduction to the Doctor, and was always\
afterwards kind to me, and interested in me; and because she was very\
fond of Agnes, and was often backwards and forwards at our house. There\
was a curious constraint between her and Mr. Wickfield, I thought (of\
whom she seemed to be afraid), that never wore off. When she came there\
of an evening, she always shrunk from accepting his escort home, and ran\
away with me instead. And sometimes, as we were running gaily across\
the Cathedral yard together, expecting to meet nobody, we would meet Mr.\
Jack Maldon, who was always surprised to see us.\
\
Mrs. Strong\'92s mama was a lady I took great delight in. Her name was Mrs.\
Markleham; but our boys used to call her the Old Soldier, on account of\
her generalship, and the skill with which she marshalled great forces\
of relations against the Doctor. She was a little, sharp-eyed woman,\
who used to wear, when she was dressed, one unchangeable cap, ornamented\
with some artificial flowers, and two artificial butterflies supposed\
to be hovering above the flowers. There was a superstition among us\
that this cap had come from France, and could only originate in the\
workmanship of that ingenious nation: but all I certainly know about it,\
is, that it always made its appearance of an evening, wheresoever Mrs.\
Markleham made HER appearance; that it was carried about to friendly\
meetings in a Hindoo basket; that the butterflies had the gift of\
trembling constantly; and that they improved the shining hours at Doctor\
Strong\'92s expense, like busy bees.\
\
I observed the Old Soldier--not to adopt the name disrespectfully--to\
pretty good advantage, on a night which is made memorable to me by\
something else I shall relate. It was the night of a little party at the\
Doctor\'92s, which was given on the occasion of Mr. Jack Maldon\'92s departure\
for India, whither he was going as a cadet, or something of that kind:\
Mr. Wickfield having at length arranged the business. It happened to be\
the Doctor\'92s birthday, too. We had had a holiday, had made presents to\
him in the morning, had made a speech to him through the head-boy, and\
had cheered him until we were hoarse, and until he had shed tears. And\
now, in the evening, Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I, went to have tea with\
him in his private capacity.\
\
Mr. Jack Maldon was there, before us. Mrs. Strong, dressed in white,\
with cherry-coloured ribbons, was playing the piano, when we went in;\
and he was leaning over her to turn the leaves. The clear red and\
white of her complexion was not so blooming and flower-like as usual, I\
thought, when she turned round; but she looked very pretty, Wonderfully\
pretty.\
\
\'91I have forgotten, Doctor,\'92 said Mrs. Strong\'92s mama, when we were\
seated, \'91to pay you the compliments of the day--though they are, as you\
may suppose, very far from being mere compliments in my case. Allow me\
to wish you many happy returns.\'92\
\
\'91I thank you, ma\'92am,\'92 replied the Doctor.\
\
\'91Many, many, many, happy returns,\'92 said the Old Soldier. \'91Not only\
for your own sake, but for Annie\'92s, and John Maldon\'92s, and many other\
people\'92s. It seems but yesterday to me, John, when you were a little\
creature, a head shorter than Master Copperfield, making baby love to\
Annie behind the gooseberry bushes in the back-garden.\'92\
\
\'91My dear mama,\'92 said Mrs. Strong, \'91never mind that now.\'92\
\
\'91Annie, don\'92t be absurd,\'92 returned her mother. \'91If you are to blush to\
hear of such things now you are an old married woman, when are you not\
to blush to hear of them?\'92\
\
\'91Old?\'92 exclaimed Mr. Jack Maldon. \'91Annie? Come!\'92\
\
\'91Yes, John,\'92 returned the Soldier. \'91Virtually, an old married woman.\
Although not old by years--for when did you ever hear me say, or who has\
ever heard me say, that a girl of twenty was old by years!--your cousin\
is the wife of the Doctor, and, as such, what I have described her. It\
is well for you, John, that your cousin is the wife of the Doctor. You\
have found in him an influential and kind friend, who will be kinder\
yet, I venture to predict, if you deserve it. I have no false pride.\
I never hesitate to admit, frankly, that there are some members of our\
family who want a friend. You were one yourself, before your cousin\'92s\
influence raised up one for you.\'92\
\
The Doctor, in the goodness of his heart, waved his hand as if to make\
light of it, and save Mr. Jack Maldon from any further reminder. But\
Mrs. Markleham changed her chair for one next the Doctor\'92s, and putting\
her fan on his coat-sleeve, said:\
\
\'91No, really, my dear Doctor, you must excuse me if I appear to dwell\
on this rather, because I feel so very strongly. I call it quite my\
monomania, it is such a subject of mine. You are a blessing to us. You\
really are a Boon, you know.\'92\
\
\'91Nonsense, nonsense,\'92 said the Doctor.\
\
\'91No, no, I beg your pardon,\'92 retorted the Old Soldier. \'91With nobody\
present, but our dear and confidential friend Mr. Wickfield, I cannot\
consent to be put down. I shall begin to assert the privileges of a\
mother-in-law, if you go on like that, and scold you. I am perfectly\
honest and outspoken. What I am saying, is what I said when you first\
overpowered me with surprise--you remember how surprised I was?--by\
proposing for Annie. Not that there was anything so very much out of\
the way, in the mere fact of the proposal--it would be ridiculous to say\
that!--but because, you having known her poor father, and having known\
her from a baby six months old, I hadn\'92t thought of you in such a light\
at all, or indeed as a marrying man in any way,--simply that, you know.\'92\
\
\'91Aye, aye,\'92 returned the Doctor, good-humouredly. \'91Never mind.\'92\
\
\'91But I DO mind,\'92 said the Old Soldier, laying her fan upon his lips. \'91I\
mind very much. I recall these things that I may be contradicted if I am\
wrong. Well! Then I spoke to Annie, and I told her what had happened.\
I said, \'93My dear, here\'92s Doctor Strong has positively been and made you\
the subject of a handsome declaration and an offer.\'94 Did I press it in\
the least? No. I said, \'93Now, Annie, tell me the truth this moment; is\
your heart free?\'94 \'93Mama,\'94 she said crying, \'93I am extremely young\'94--which\
was perfectly true--\'93and I hardly know if I have a heart at all.\'94 \'93Then,\
my dear,\'94 I said, \'93you may rely upon it, it\'92s free. At all events, my\
love,\'94 said I, \'93Doctor Strong is in an agitated state of mind, and\
must be answered. He cannot be kept in his present state of suspense.\'94\
 \'93Mama,\'94 said Annie, still crying, \'93would he be unhappy without me? If he\
would, I honour and respect him so much, that I think I will have him.\'94\
 So it was settled. And then, and not till then, I said to Annie, \'93Annie,\
Doctor Strong will not only be your husband, but he will represent your\
late father: he will represent the head of our family, he will represent\
the wisdom and station, and I may say the means, of our family; and will\
be, in short, a Boon to it.\'94 I used the word at the time, and I have\
used it again, today. If I have any merit it is consistency.\'92\
\
The daughter had sat quite silent and still during this speech, with her\
eyes fixed on the ground; her cousin standing near her, and looking on\
the ground too. She now said very softly, in a trembling voice:\
\
\'91Mama, I hope you have finished?\'92 \'91No, my dear Annie,\'92 returned the Old\
Soldier, \'91I have not quite finished. Since you ask me, my love, I reply\
that I have not. I complain that you really are a little unnatural\
towards your own family; and, as it is of no use complaining to you. I\
mean to complain to your husband. Now, my dear Doctor, do look at that\
silly wife of yours.\'92\
\
As the Doctor turned his kind face, with its smile of simplicity and\
gentleness, towards her, she drooped her head more. I noticed that Mr.\
Wickfield looked at her steadily.\
\
\'91When I happened to say to that naughty thing, the other day,\'92 pursued\
her mother, shaking her head and her fan at her, playfully, \'91that there\
was a family circumstance she might mention to you--indeed, I think, was\
bound to mention--she said, that to mention it was to ask a favour;\
and that, as you were too generous, and as for her to ask was always to\
have, she wouldn\'92t.\'92\
\
\'91Annie, my dear,\'92 said the Doctor. \'91That was wrong. It robbed me of a\
pleasure.\'92\
\
\'91Almost the very words I said to her!\'92 exclaimed her mother. \'91Now\
really, another time, when I know what she would tell you but for this\
reason, and won\'92t, I have a great mind, my dear Doctor, to tell you\
myself.\'92\
\
\'91I shall be glad if you will,\'92 returned the Doctor.\
\
\'91Shall I?\'92\
\
\'91Certainly.\'92\
\
\'91Well, then, I will!\'92 said the Old Soldier. \'91That\'92s a bargain.\'92 And\
having, I suppose, carried her point, she tapped the Doctor\'92s hand\
several times with her fan (which she kissed first), and returned\
triumphantly to her former station.\
\
Some more company coming in, among whom were the two masters and Adams,\
the talk became general; and it naturally turned on Mr. Jack Maldon, and\
his voyage, and the country he was going to, and his various plans and\
prospects. He was to leave that night, after supper, in a post-chaise,\
for Gravesend; where the ship, in which he was to make the voyage, lay;\
and was to be gone--unless he came home on leave, or for his health--I\
don\'92t know how many years. I recollect it was settled by general\
consent that India was quite a misrepresented country, and had nothing\
objectionable in it, but a tiger or two, and a little heat in the warm\
part of the day. For my own part, I looked on Mr. Jack Maldon as a\
modern Sindbad, and pictured him the bosom friend of all the Rajahs in\
the East, sitting under canopies, smoking curly golden pipes--a mile\
long, if they could be straightened out.\
\
Mrs. Strong was a very pretty singer: as I knew, who often heard her\
singing by herself. But, whether she was afraid of singing before\
people, or was out of voice that evening, it was certain that she\
couldn\'92t sing at all. She tried a duet, once, with her cousin Maldon,\
but could not so much as begin; and afterwards, when she tried to sing\
by herself, although she began sweetly, her voice died away on a sudden,\
and left her quite distressed, with her head hanging down over the keys.\
The good Doctor said she was nervous, and, to relieve her, proposed a\
round game at cards; of which he knew as much as of the art of playing\
the trombone. But I remarked that the Old Soldier took him into custody\
directly, for her partner; and instructed him, as the first preliminary\
of initiation, to give her all the silver he had in his pocket.\
\
We had a merry game, not made the less merry by the Doctor\'92s mistakes,\
of which he committed an innumerable quantity, in spite of the\
watchfulness of the butterflies, and to their great aggravation. Mrs.\
Strong had declined to play, on the ground of not feeling very well; and\
her cousin Maldon had excused himself because he had some packing to\
do. When he had done it, however, he returned, and they sat together,\
talking, on the sofa. From time to time she came and looked over the\
Doctor\'92s hand, and told him what to play. She was very pale, as she\
bent over him, and I thought her finger trembled as she pointed out\
the cards; but the Doctor was quite happy in her attention, and took no\
notice of this, if it were so.\
\
At supper, we were hardly so gay. Everyone appeared to feel that a\
parting of that sort was an awkward thing, and that the nearer it\
approached, the more awkward it was. Mr. Jack Maldon tried to be very\
talkative, but was not at his ease, and made matters worse. And they\
were not improved, as it appeared to me, by the Old Soldier: who\
continually recalled passages of Mr. Jack Maldon\'92s youth.\
\
The Doctor, however, who felt, I am sure, that he was making everybody\
happy, was well pleased, and had no suspicion but that we were all at\
the utmost height of enjoyment.\
\
\'91Annie, my dear,\'92 said he, looking at his watch, and filling his glass,\
\'91it is past your cousin Jack\'92s time, and we must not detain him, since\
time and tide--both concerned in this case--wait for no man. Mr. Jack\
Maldon, you have a long voyage, and a strange country, before you; but\
many men have had both, and many men will have both, to the end of time.\
The winds you are going to tempt, have wafted thousands upon thousands\
to fortune, and brought thousands upon thousands happily back.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s an affecting thing,\'92 said Mrs. Markleham--\'91however it\'92s viewed,\
it\'92s affecting, to see a fine young man one has known from an infant,\
going away to the other end of the world, leaving all he knows behind,\
and not knowing what\'92s before him. A young man really well deserves\
constant support and patronage,\'92 looking at the Doctor, \'91who makes such\
sacrifices.\'92\
\
\'91Time will go fast with you, Mr. Jack Maldon,\'92 pursued the Doctor,\
\'91and fast with all of us. Some of us can hardly expect, perhaps, in the\
natural course of things, to greet you on your return. The next best\
thing is to hope to do it, and that\'92s my case. I shall not weary you\
with good advice. You have long had a good model before you, in your\
cousin Annie. Imitate her virtues as nearly as you can.\'92\
\
Mrs. Markleham fanned herself, and shook her head.\
\
\'91Farewell, Mr. Jack,\'92 said the Doctor, standing up; on which we all\
stood up. \'91A prosperous voyage out, a thriving career abroad, and a\
happy return home!\'92\
\
We all drank the toast, and all shook hands with Mr. Jack Maldon; after\
which he hastily took leave of the ladies who were there, and hurried\
to the door, where he was received, as he got into the chaise, with a\
tremendous broadside of cheers discharged by our boys, who had assembled\
on the lawn for the purpose. Running in among them to swell the ranks,\
I was very near the chaise when it rolled away; and I had a lively\
impression made upon me, in the midst of the noise and dust, of having\
seen Mr. Jack Maldon rattle past with an agitated face, and something\
cherry-coloured in his hand.\
\
After another broadside for the Doctor, and another for the Doctor\'92s\
wife, the boys dispersed, and I went back into the house, where I found\
the guests all standing in a group about the Doctor, discussing how Mr.\
Jack Maldon had gone away, and how he had borne it, and how he had\
felt it, and all the rest of it. In the midst of these remarks, Mrs.\
Markleham cried: \'91Where\'92s Annie?\'92\
\
No Annie was there; and when they called to her, no Annie replied. But\
all pressing out of the room, in a crowd, to see what was the matter, we\
found her lying on the hall floor. There was great alarm at first, until\
it was found that she was in a swoon, and that the swoon was yielding\
to the usual means of recovery; when the Doctor, who had lifted her\
head upon his knee, put her curls aside with his hand, and said, looking\
around:\
\
\'91Poor Annie! She\'92s so faithful and tender-hearted! It\'92s the parting from\
her old playfellow and friend--her favourite cousin--that has done this.\
Ah! It\'92s a pity! I am very sorry!\'92\
\
When she opened her eyes, and saw where she was, and that we were all\
standing about her, she arose with assistance: turning her head, as she\
did so, to lay it on the Doctor\'92s shoulder--or to hide it, I don\'92t know\
which. We went into the drawing-room, to leave her with the Doctor and\
her mother; but she said, it seemed, that she was better than she had\
been since morning, and that she would rather be brought among us; so\
they brought her in, looking very white and weak, I thought, and sat her\
on a sofa.\
\
\'91Annie, my dear,\'92 said her mother, doing something to her dress. \'91See\
here! You have lost a bow. Will anybody be so good as find a ribbon; a\
cherry-coloured ribbon?\'92\
\
It was the one she had worn at her bosom. We all looked for it; I myself\
looked everywhere, I am certain--but nobody could find it.\
\
\'91Do you recollect where you had it last, Annie?\'92 said her mother.\
\
I wondered how I could have thought she looked white, or anything but\
burning red, when she answered that she had had it safe, a little while\
ago, she thought, but it was not worth looking for.\
\
Nevertheless, it was looked for again, and still not found. She\
entreated that there might be no more searching; but it was still sought\
for, in a desultory way, until she was quite well, and the company took\
their departure.\
\
We walked very slowly home, Mr. Wickfield, Agnes, and I--Agnes and I\
admiring the moonlight, and Mr. Wickfield scarcely raising his eyes from\
the ground. When we, at last, reached our own door, Agnes discovered\
that she had left her little reticule behind. Delighted to be of any\
service to her, I ran back to fetch it.\
\
I went into the supper-room where it had been left, which was deserted\
and dark. But a door of communication between that and the Doctor\'92s\
study, where there was a light, being open, I passed on there, to say\
what I wanted, and to get a candle.\
\
The Doctor was sitting in his easy-chair by the fireside, and his young\
wife was on a stool at his feet. The Doctor, with a complacent smile,\
was reading aloud some manuscript explanation or statement of a theory\
out of that interminable Dictionary, and she was looking up at him. But\
with such a face as I never saw. It was so beautiful in its form, it was\
so ashy pale, it was so fixed in its abstraction, it was so full of a\
wild, sleep-walking, dreamy horror of I don\'92t know what. The eyes\
were wide open, and her brown hair fell in two rich clusters on her\
shoulders, and on her white dress, disordered by the want of the lost\
ribbon. Distinctly as I recollect her look, I cannot say of what it was\
expressive, I cannot even say of what it is expressive to me now, rising\
again before my older judgement. Penitence, humiliation, shame, pride,\
love, and trustfulness--I see them all; and in them all, I see that\
horror of I don\'92t know what.\
\
My entrance, and my saying what I wanted, roused her. It disturbed the\
Doctor too, for when I went back to replace the candle I had taken from\
the table, he was patting her head, in his fatherly way, and saying he\
was a merciless drone to let her tempt him into reading on; and he would\
have her go to bed.\
\
But she asked him, in a rapid, urgent manner, to let her stay--to let\
her feel assured (I heard her murmur some broken words to this effect)\
that she was in his confidence that night. And, as she turned again\
towards him, after glancing at me as I left the room and went out at the\
door, I saw her cross her hands upon his knee, and look up at him with\
the same face, something quieted, as he resumed his reading.\
\
It made a great impression on me, and I remembered it a long time\
afterwards; as I shall have occasion to narrate when the time comes.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 17. SOMEBODY TURNS UP\
\
\
It has not occurred to me to mention Peggotty since I ran away; but, of\
course, I wrote her a letter almost as soon as I was housed at Dover,\
and another, and a longer letter, containing all particulars fully\
related, when my aunt took me formally under her protection. On my being\
settled at Doctor Strong\'92s I wrote to her again, detailing my happy\
condition and prospects. I never could have derived anything like the\
pleasure from spending the money Mr. Dick had given me, that I felt in\
sending a gold half-guinea to Peggotty, per post, enclosed in this last\
letter, to discharge the sum I had borrowed of her: in which epistle,\
not before, I mentioned about the young man with the donkey-cart.\
\
To these communications Peggotty replied as promptly, if not as\
concisely, as a merchant\'92s clerk. Her utmost powers of expression (which\
were certainly not great in ink) were exhausted in the attempt to write\
what she felt on the subject of my journey. Four sides of incoherent and\
interjectional beginnings of sentences, that had no end, except blots,\
were inadequate to afford her any relief. But the blots were more\
expressive to me than the best composition; for they showed me that\
Peggotty had been crying all over the paper, and what could I have\
desired more?\
\
I made out, without much difficulty, that she could not take quite\
kindly to my aunt yet. The notice was too short after so long a\
prepossession the other way. We never knew a person, she wrote; but to\
think that Miss Betsey should seem to be so different from what she had\
been thought to be, was a Moral!--that was her word. She was evidently\
still afraid of Miss Betsey, for she sent her grateful duty to her but\
timidly; and she was evidently afraid of me, too, and entertained the\
probability of my running away again soon: if I might judge from the\
repeated hints she threw out, that the coach-fare to Yarmouth was always\
to be had of her for the asking.\
\
She gave me one piece of intelligence which affected me very much,\
namely, that there had been a sale of the furniture at our old home, and\
that Mr. and Miss Murdstone were gone away, and the house was shut up,\
to be let or sold. God knows I had no part in it while they remained\
there, but it pained me to think of the dear old place as altogether\
abandoned; of the weeds growing tall in the garden, and the fallen\
leaves lying thick and wet upon the paths. I imagined how the winds\
of winter would howl round it, how the cold rain would beat upon the\
window-glass, how the moon would make ghosts on the walls of the empty\
rooms, watching their solitude all night. I thought afresh of the grave\
in the churchyard, underneath the tree: and it seemed as if the house\
were dead too, now, and all connected with my father and mother were\
faded away.\
\
There was no other news in Peggotty\'92s letters. Mr. Barkis was an\
excellent husband, she said, though still a little near; but we all had\
our faults, and she had plenty (though I am sure I don\'92t know what they\
were); and he sent his duty, and my little bedroom was always ready for\
me. Mr. Peggotty was well, and Ham was well, and Mrs. Gummidge was but\
poorly, and little Em\'92ly wouldn\'92t send her love, but said that Peggotty\
might send it, if she liked.\
\
All this intelligence I dutifully imparted to my aunt, only reserving\
to myself the mention of little Em\'92ly, to whom I instinctively felt\
that she would not very tenderly incline. While I was yet new at Doctor\
Strong\'92s, she made several excursions over to Canterbury to see me, and\
always at unseasonable hours: with the view, I suppose, of taking me by\
surprise. But, finding me well employed, and bearing a good character,\
and hearing on all hands that I rose fast in the school, she soon\
discontinued these visits. I saw her on a Saturday, every third or\
fourth week, when I went over to Dover for a treat; and I saw Mr. Dick\
every alternate Wednesday, when he arrived by stage-coach at noon, to\
stay until next morning.\
\
On these occasions Mr. Dick never travelled without a leathern\
writing-desk, containing a supply of stationery and the Memorial; in\
relation to which document he had a notion that time was beginning to\
press now, and that it really must be got out of hand.\
\
Mr. Dick was very partial to gingerbread. To render his visits the more\
agreeable, my aunt had instructed me to open a credit for him at a cake\
shop, which was hampered with the stipulation that he should not be\
served with more than one shilling\'92s-worth in the course of any one day.\
This, and the reference of all his little bills at the county inn where\
he slept, to my aunt, before they were paid, induced me to suspect that\
he was only allowed to rattle his money, and not to spend it. I found\
on further investigation that this was so, or at least there was an\
agreement between him and my aunt that he should account to her for\
all his disbursements. As he had no idea of deceiving her, and always\
desired to please her, he was thus made chary of launching into expense.\
On this point, as well as on all other possible points, Mr. Dick was\
convinced that my aunt was the wisest and most wonderful of women; as he\
repeatedly told me with infinite secrecy, and always in a whisper.\
\
\'91Trotwood,\'92 said Mr. Dick, with an air of mystery, after imparting this\
confidence to me, one Wednesday; \'91who\'92s the man that hides near our\
house and frightens her?\'92\
\
\'91Frightens my aunt, sir?\'92\
\
Mr. Dick nodded. \'91I thought nothing would have frightened her,\'92 he said,\
\'91for she\'92s--\'92 here he whispered softly, \'91don\'92t mention it--the wisest\
and most wonderful of women.\'92 Having said which, he drew back, to\
observe the effect which this description of her made upon me.\
\
\'91The first time he came,\'92 said Mr. Dick, \'91was--let me see--sixteen\
hundred and forty-nine was the date of King Charles\'92s execution. I think\
you said sixteen hundred and forty-nine?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, sir.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know how it can be,\'92 said Mr. Dick, sorely puzzled and shaking\
his head. \'91I don\'92t think I am as old as that.\'92\
\
\'91Was it in that year that the man appeared, sir?\'92 I asked.\
\
\'91Why, really\'92 said Mr. Dick, \'91I don\'92t see how it can have been in that\
year, Trotwood. Did you get that date out of history?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, sir.\'92\
\
\'91I suppose history never lies, does it?\'92 said Mr. Dick, with a gleam of\
hope.\
\
\'91Oh dear, no, sir!\'92 I replied, most decisively. I was ingenuous and\
young, and I thought so.\
\
\'91I can\'92t make it out,\'92 said Mr. Dick, shaking his head. \'91There\'92s\
something wrong, somewhere. However, it was very soon after the mistake\
was made of putting some of the trouble out of King Charles\'92s head into\
my head, that the man first came. I was walking out with Miss Trotwood\
after tea, just at dark, and there he was, close to our house.\'92\
\
\'91Walking about?\'92 I inquired.\
\
\'91Walking about?\'92 repeated Mr. Dick. \'91Let me see, I must recollect a bit.\
N-no, no; he was not walking about.\'92\
\
I asked, as the shortest way to get at it, what he WAS doing.\
\
\'91Well, he wasn\'92t there at all,\'92 said Mr. Dick, \'91until he came up behind\
her, and whispered. Then she turned round and fainted, and I stood still\
and looked at him, and he walked away; but that he should have\
been hiding ever since (in the ground or somewhere), is the most\
extraordinary thing!\'92\
\
\'91HAS he been hiding ever since?\'92 I asked.\
\
\'91To be sure he has,\'92 retorted Mr. Dick, nodding his head gravely. \'91Never\
came out, till last night! We were walking last night, and he came up\
behind her again, and I knew him again.\'92\
\
\'91And did he frighten my aunt again?\'92\
\
\'91All of a shiver,\'92 said Mr. Dick, counterfeiting that affection and\
making his teeth chatter. \'91Held by the palings. Cried. But, Trotwood,\
come here,\'92 getting me close to him, that he might whisper very softly;\
\'91why did she give him money, boy, in the moonlight?\'92\
\
\'91He was a beggar, perhaps.\'92\
\
Mr. Dick shook his head, as utterly renouncing the suggestion; and\
having replied a great many times, and with great confidence, \'91No\
beggar, no beggar, no beggar, sir!\'92 went on to say, that from his window\
he had afterwards, and late at night, seen my aunt give this person\
money outside the garden rails in the moonlight, who then slunk\
away--into the ground again, as he thought probable--and was seen no\
more: while my aunt came hurriedly and secretly back into the house, and\
had, even that morning, been quite different from her usual self; which\
preyed on Mr. Dick\'92s mind.\
\
I had not the least belief, in the outset of this story, that the\
unknown was anything but a delusion of Mr. Dick\'92s, and one of the line\
of that ill-fated Prince who occasioned him so much difficulty; but\
after some reflection I began to entertain the question whether an\
attempt, or threat of an attempt, might have been twice made to take\
poor Mr. Dick himself from under my aunt\'92s protection, and whether\
my aunt, the strength of whose kind feeling towards him I knew from\
herself, might have been induced to pay a price for his peace and quiet.\
As I was already much attached to Mr. Dick, and very solicitous for his\
welfare, my fears favoured this supposition; and for a long time his\
Wednesday hardly ever came round, without my entertaining a misgiving\
that he would not be on the coach-box as usual. There he always\
appeared, however, grey-headed, laughing, and happy; and he never had\
anything more to tell of the man who could frighten my aunt.\
\
These Wednesdays were the happiest days of Mr. Dick\'92s life; they were\
far from being the least happy of mine. He soon became known to every\
boy in the school; and though he never took an active part in any game\
but kite-flying, was as deeply interested in all our sports as anyone\
among us. How often have I seen him, intent upon a match at marbles\
or pegtop, looking on with a face of unutterable interest, and hardly\
breathing at the critical times! How often, at hare and hounds, have\
I seen him mounted on a little knoll, cheering the whole field on\
to action, and waving his hat above his grey head, oblivious of King\
Charles the Martyr\'92s head, and all belonging to it! How many a\
summer hour have I known to be but blissful minutes to him in\
the cricket-field! How many winter days have I seen him, standing\
blue-nosed, in the snow and east wind, looking at the boys going down\
the long slide, and clapping his worsted gloves in rapture!\
\
He was an universal favourite, and his ingenuity in little things was\
transcendent. He could cut oranges into such devices as none of us had\
an idea of. He could make a boat out of anything, from a skewer upwards.\
He could turn cramp-bones into chessmen; fashion Roman chariots from old\
court cards; make spoked wheels out of cotton reels, and bird-cages of\
old wire. But he was greatest of all, perhaps, in the articles of string\
and straw; with which we were all persuaded he could do anything that\
could be done by hands.\
\
Mr. Dick\'92s renown was not long confined to us. After a few Wednesdays,\
Doctor Strong himself made some inquiries of me about him, and I told\
him all my aunt had told me; which interested the Doctor so much that\
he requested, on the occasion of his next visit, to be presented to him.\
This ceremony I performed; and the Doctor begging Mr. Dick, whensoever\
he should not find me at the coach office, to come on there, and rest\
himself until our morning\'92s work was over, it soon passed into a custom\
for Mr. Dick to come on as a matter of course, and, if we were a little\
late, as often happened on a Wednesday, to walk about the courtyard,\
waiting for me. Here he made the acquaintance of the Doctor\'92s beautiful\
young wife (paler than formerly, all this time; more rarely seen by\
me or anyone, I think; and not so gay, but not less beautiful), and so\
became more and more familiar by degrees, until, at last, he would come\
into the school and wait. He always sat in a particular corner, on a\
particular stool, which was called \'91Dick\'92, after him; here he would sit,\
with his grey head bent forward, attentively listening to whatever might\
be going on, with a profound veneration for the learning he had never\
been able to acquire.\
\
This veneration Mr. Dick extended to the Doctor, whom he thought the\
most subtle and accomplished philosopher of any age. It was long before\
Mr. Dick ever spoke to him otherwise than bareheaded; and even when he\
and the Doctor had struck up quite a friendship, and would walk together\
by the hour, on that side of the courtyard which was known among us as\
The Doctor\'92s Walk, Mr. Dick would pull off his hat at intervals to show\
his respect for wisdom and knowledge. How it ever came about that the\
Doctor began to read out scraps of the famous Dictionary, in these\
walks, I never knew; perhaps he felt it all the same, at first, as\
reading to himself. However, it passed into a custom too; and Mr. Dick,\
listening with a face shining with pride and pleasure, in his heart of\
hearts believed the Dictionary to be the most delightful book in the\
world.\
\
As I think of them going up and down before those schoolroom\
windows--the Doctor reading with his complacent smile, an occasional\
flourish of the manuscript, or grave motion of his head; and Mr. Dick\
listening, enchained by interest, with his poor wits calmly wandering\
God knows where, upon the wings of hard words--I think of it as one of\
the pleasantest things, in a quiet way, that I have ever seen. I feel\
as if they might go walking to and fro for ever, and the world might\
somehow be the better for it--as if a thousand things it makes a noise\
about, were not one half so good for it, or me.\
\
Agnes was one of Mr. Dick\'92s friends, very soon; and in often coming\
to the house, he made acquaintance with Uriah. The friendship between\
himself and me increased continually, and it was maintained on this odd\
footing: that, while Mr. Dick came professedly to look after me as my\
guardian, he always consulted me in any little matter of doubt that\
arose, and invariably guided himself by my advice; not only having a\
high respect for my native sagacity, but considering that I inherited a\
good deal from my aunt.\
\
One Thursday morning, when I was about to walk with Mr. Dick from the\
hotel to the coach office before going back to school (for we had an\
hour\'92s school before breakfast), I met Uriah in the street, who reminded\
me of the promise I had made to take tea with himself and his mother:\
adding, with a writhe, \'91But I didn\'92t expect you to keep it, Master\
Copperfield, we\'92re so very umble.\'92\
\
I really had not yet been able to make up my mind whether I liked Uriah\
or detested him; and I was very doubtful about it still, as I stood\
looking him in the face in the street. But I felt it quite an affront to\
be supposed proud, and said I only wanted to be asked.\
\
\'91Oh, if that\'92s all, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Uriah, \'91and it really\
isn\'92t our umbleness that prevents you, will you come this evening?\
But if it is our umbleness, I hope you won\'92t mind owning to it, Master\
Copperfield; for we are well aware of our condition.\'92\
\
I said I would mention it to Mr. Wickfield, and if he approved, as I had\
no doubt he would, I would come with pleasure. So, at six o\'92clock that\
evening, which was one of the early office evenings, I announced myself\
as ready, to Uriah.\
\
\'91Mother will be proud, indeed,\'92 he said, as we walked away together. \'91Or\
she would be proud, if it wasn\'92t sinful, Master Copperfield.\'92\
\
\'91Yet you didn\'92t mind supposing I was proud this morning,\'92 I returned.\
\
\'91Oh dear, no, Master Copperfield!\'92 returned Uriah. \'91Oh, believe me, no!\
Such a thought never came into my head! I shouldn\'92t have deemed it at\
all proud if you had thought US too umble for you. Because we are so\
very umble.\'92\
\
\'91Have you been studying much law lately?\'92 I asked, to change the\
subject.\
\
\'91Oh, Master Copperfield,\'92 he said, with an air of self-denial, \'91my\
reading is hardly to be called study. I have passed an hour or two in\
the evening, sometimes, with Mr. Tidd.\'92\
\
\'91Rather hard, I suppose?\'92 said I. \'91He is hard to me sometimes,\'92 returned\
Uriah. \'91But I don\'92t know what he might be to a gifted person.\'92\
\
After beating a little tune on his chin as he walked on, with the two\
forefingers of his skeleton right hand, he added:\
\
\'91There are expressions, you see, Master Copperfield--Latin words\
and terms--in Mr. Tidd, that are trying to a reader of my umble\
attainments.\'92\
\
\'91Would you like to be taught Latin?\'92 I said briskly. \'91I will teach it\
you with pleasure, as I learn it.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, thank you, Master Copperfield,\'92 he answered, shaking his head. \'91I\
am sure it\'92s very kind of you to make the offer, but I am much too umble\
to accept it.\'92\
\
\'91What nonsense, Uriah!\'92\
\
\'91Oh, indeed you must excuse me, Master Copperfield! I am greatly\
obliged, and I should like it of all things, I assure you; but I am far\
too umble. There are people enough to tread upon me in my lowly state,\
without my doing outrage to their feelings by possessing learning.\
Learning ain\'92t for me. A person like myself had better not aspire. If he\
is to get on in life, he must get on umbly, Master Copperfield!\'92\
\
I never saw his mouth so wide, or the creases in his cheeks so deep, as\
when he delivered himself of these sentiments: shaking his head all the\
time, and writhing modestly.\
\
\'91I think you are wrong, Uriah,\'92 I said. \'91I dare say there are several\
things that I could teach you, if you would like to learn them.\'92\
\
\'91Oh, I don\'92t doubt that, Master Copperfield,\'92 he answered; \'91not in the\
least. But not being umble yourself, you don\'92t judge well, perhaps, for\
them that are. I won\'92t provoke my betters with knowledge, thank you. I\'92m\
much too umble. Here is my umble dwelling, Master Copperfield!\'92\
\
We entered a low, old-fashioned room, walked straight into from the\
street, and found there Mrs. Heep, who was the dead image of Uriah, only\
short. She received me with the utmost humility, and apologized to me\
for giving her son a kiss, observing that, lowly as they were, they\
had their natural affections, which they hoped would give no offence to\
anyone. It was a perfectly decent room, half parlour and half kitchen,\
but not at all a snug room. The tea-things were set upon the table, and\
the kettle was boiling on the hob. There was a chest of drawers with an\
escritoire top, for Uriah to read or write at of an evening; there was\
Uriah\'92s blue bag lying down and vomiting papers; there was a company of\
Uriah\'92s books commanded by Mr. Tidd; there was a corner cupboard: and\
there were the usual articles of furniture. I don\'92t remember that any\
individual object had a bare, pinched, spare look; but I do remember\
that the whole place had.\
\
It was perhaps a part of Mrs. Heep\'92s humility, that she still wore\
weeds. Notwithstanding the lapse of time that had occurred since Mr.\
Heep\'92s decease, she still wore weeds. I think there was some compromise\
in the cap; but otherwise she was as weedy as in the early days of her\
mourning.\
\
\'91This is a day to be remembered, my Uriah, I am sure,\'92 said Mrs. Heep,\
making the tea, \'91when Master Copperfield pays us a visit.\'92\
\
\'91I said you\'92d think so, mother,\'92 said Uriah.\
\
\'91If I could have wished father to remain among us for any reason,\'92 said\
Mrs. Heep, \'91it would have been, that he might have known his company\
this afternoon.\'92\
\
I felt embarrassed by these compliments; but I was sensible, too, of\
being entertained as an honoured guest, and I thought Mrs. Heep an\
agreeable woman.\
\
\'91My Uriah,\'92 said Mrs. Heep, \'91has looked forward to this, sir, a long\
while. He had his fears that our umbleness stood in the way, and I\
joined in them myself. Umble we are, umble we have been, umble we shall\
ever be,\'92 said Mrs. Heep.\
\
\'91I am sure you have no occasion to be so, ma\'92am,\'92 I said, \'91unless you\
like.\'92\
\
\'91Thank you, sir,\'92 retorted Mrs. Heep. \'91We know our station and are\
thankful in it.\'92\
\
I found that Mrs. Heep gradually got nearer to me, and that Uriah\
gradually got opposite to me, and that they respectfully plied me\
with the choicest of the eatables on the table. There was nothing\
particularly choice there, to be sure; but I took the will for the deed,\
and felt that they were very attentive. Presently they began to talk\
about aunts, and then I told them about mine; and about fathers and\
mothers, and then I told them about mine; and then Mrs. Heep began to\
talk about fathers-in-law, and then I began to tell her about mine--but\
stopped, because my aunt had advised me to observe a silence on that\
subject. A tender young cork, however, would have had no more chance\
against a pair of corkscrews, or a tender young tooth against a pair of\
dentists, or a little shuttlecock against two battledores, than I had\
against Uriah and Mrs. Heep. They did just what they liked with me; and\
wormed things out of me that I had no desire to tell, with a certainty\
I blush to think of, the more especially, as in my juvenile frankness, I\
took some credit to myself for being so confidential and felt that I was\
quite the patron of my two respectful entertainers.\
\
They were very fond of one another: that was certain. I take it, that\
had its effect upon me, as a touch of nature; but the skill with which\
the one followed up whatever the other said, was a touch of art which I\
was still less proof against. When there was nothing more to be got\
out of me about myself (for on the Murdstone and Grinby life, and on my\
journey, I was dumb), they began about Mr. Wickfield and Agnes. Uriah\
threw the ball to Mrs. Heep, Mrs. Heep caught it and threw it back to\
Uriah, Uriah kept it up a little while, then sent it back to Mrs. Heep,\
and so they went on tossing it about until I had no idea who had got it,\
and was quite bewildered. The ball itself was always changing too. Now\
it was Mr. Wickfield, now Agnes, now the excellence of Mr. Wickfield,\
now my admiration of Agnes; now the extent of Mr. Wickfield\'92s business\
and resources, now our domestic life after dinner; now, the wine that\
Mr. Wickfield took, the reason why he took it, and the pity that it was\
he took so much; now one thing, now another, then everything at once;\
and all the time, without appearing to speak very often, or to do\
anything but sometimes encourage them a little, for fear they should be\
overcome by their humility and the honour of my company, I found myself\
perpetually letting out something or other that I had no business to\
let out and seeing the effect of it in the twinkling of Uriah\'92s dinted\
nostrils.\
\
I had begun to be a little uncomfortable, and to wish myself well out\
of the visit, when a figure coming down the street passed the door--it\
stood open to air the room, which was warm, the weather being close for\
the time of year--came back again, looked in, and walked in, exclaiming\
loudly, \'91Copperfield! Is it possible?\'92\
\
It was Mr. Micawber! It was Mr. Micawber, with his eye-glass, and\
his walking-stick, and his shirt-collar, and his genteel air, and the\
condescending roll in his voice, all complete!\
\
\'91My dear Copperfield,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, putting out his hand, \'91this is\
indeed a meeting which is calculated to impress the mind with a sense\
of the instability and uncertainty of all human--in short, it is a most\
extraordinary meeting. Walking along the street, reflecting upon the\
probability of something turning up (of which I am at present rather\
sanguine), I find a young but valued friend turn up, who is connected\
with the most eventful period of my life; I may say, with the\
turning-point of my existence. Copperfield, my dear fellow, how do you\
do?\'92\
\
I cannot say--I really cannot say--that I was glad to see Mr. Micawber\
there; but I was glad to see him too, and shook hands with him,\
heartily, inquiring how Mrs. Micawber was.\
\
\'91Thank you,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, waving his hand as of old, and settling\
his chin in his shirt-collar. \'91She is tolerably convalescent. The twins\
no longer derive their sustenance from Nature\'92s founts--in short,\'92 said\
Mr. Micawber, in one of his bursts of confidence, \'91they are weaned--and\
Mrs. Micawber is, at present, my travelling companion. She will be\
rejoiced, Copperfield, to renew her acquaintance with one who has\
proved himself in all respects a worthy minister at the sacred altar of\
friendship.\'92\
\
I said I should be delighted to see her.\
\
\'91You are very good,\'92 said Mr. Micawber.\
\
Mr. Micawber then smiled, settled his chin again, and looked about him.\
\
\'91I have discovered my friend Copperfield,\'92 said Mr. Micawber genteelly,\
and without addressing himself particularly to anyone, \'91not in solitude,\
but partaking of a social meal in company with a widow lady, and one who\
is apparently her offspring--in short,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, in another\
of his bursts of confidence, \'91her son. I shall esteem it an honour to be\
presented.\'92\
\
I could do no less, under these circumstances, than make Mr. Micawber\
known to Uriah Heep and his mother; which I accordingly did. As they\
abased themselves before him, Mr. Micawber took a seat, and waved his\
hand in his most courtly manner.\
\
\'91Any friend of my friend Copperfield\'92s,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91has a\
personal claim upon myself.\'92\
\
\'91We are too umble, sir,\'92 said Mrs. Heep, \'91my son and me, to be the\
friends of Master Copperfield. He has been so good as take his tea with\
us, and we are thankful to him for his company, also to you, sir, for\
your notice.\'92\
\
\'91Ma\'92am,\'92 returned Mr. Micawber, with a bow, \'91you are very obliging: and\
what are you doing, Copperfield? Still in the wine trade?\'92\
\
I was excessively anxious to get Mr. Micawber away; and replied, with my\
hat in my hand, and a very red face, I have no doubt, that I was a pupil\
at Doctor Strong\'92s.\
\
\'91A pupil?\'92 said Mr. Micawber, raising his eyebrows. \'91I am extremely\
happy to hear it. Although a mind like my friend Copperfield\'92s\'92--to\
Uriah and Mrs. Heep--\'91does not require that cultivation which, without\
his knowledge of men and things, it would require, still it is a rich\
soil teeming with latent vegetation--in short,\'92 said Mr. Micawber,\
smiling, in another burst of confidence, \'91it is an intellect capable of\
getting up the classics to any extent.\'92\
\
Uriah, with his long hands slowly twining over one another, made a\
ghastly writhe from the waist upwards, to express his concurrence in\
this estimation of me.\
\
\'91Shall we go and see Mrs. Micawber, sir?\'92 I said, to get Mr. Micawber\
away.\
\
\'91If you will do her that favour, Copperfield,\'92 replied Mr. Micawber,\
rising. \'91I have no scruple in saying, in the presence of our friends\
here, that I am a man who has, for some years, contended against the\
pressure of pecuniary difficulties.\'92 I knew he was certain to say\
something of this kind; he always would be so boastful about his\
difficulties. \'91Sometimes I have risen superior to my difficulties.\
Sometimes my difficulties have--in short, have floored me. There have\
been times when I have administered a succession of facers to them;\
there have been times when they have been too many for me, and I have\
given in, and said to Mrs. Micawber, in the words of Cato, \'93Plato, thou\
reasonest well. It\'92s all up now. I can show fight no more.\'94 But at no\
time of my life,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91have I enjoyed a higher degree of\
satisfaction than in pouring my griefs (if I may describe difficulties,\
chiefly arising out of warrants of attorney and promissory notes at two\
and four months, by that word) into the bosom of my friend Copperfield.\'92\
\
Mr. Micawber closed this handsome tribute by saying, \'91Mr. Heep! Good\
evening. Mrs. Heep! Your servant,\'92 and then walking out with me in his\
most fashionable manner, making a good deal of noise on the pavement\
with his shoes, and humming a tune as we went.\
\
It was a little inn where Mr. Micawber put up, and he occupied a little\
room in it, partitioned off from the commercial room, and strongly\
flavoured with tobacco-smoke. I think it was over the kitchen, because\
a warm greasy smell appeared to come up through the chinks in the floor,\
and there was a flabby perspiration on the walls. I know it was near the\
bar, on account of the smell of spirits and jingling of glasses. Here,\
recumbent on a small sofa, underneath a picture of a race-horse, with\
her head close to the fire, and her feet pushing the mustard off the\
dumb-waiter at the other end of the room, was Mrs. Micawber, to whom Mr.\
Micawber entered first, saying, \'91My dear, allow me to introduce to you a\
pupil of Doctor Strong\'92s.\'92\
\
I noticed, by the by, that although Mr. Micawber was just as much\
confused as ever about my age and standing, he always remembered, as a\
genteel thing, that I was a pupil of Doctor Strong\'92s.\
\
Mrs. Micawber was amazed, but very glad to see me. I was very glad to\
see her too, and, after an affectionate greeting on both sides, sat down\
on the small sofa near her.\
\
\'91My dear,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91if you will mention to Copperfield what\
our present position is, which I have no doubt he will like to know, I\
will go and look at the paper the while, and see whether anything turns\
up among the advertisements.\'92\
\
\'91I thought you were at Plymouth, ma\'92am,\'92 I said to Mrs. Micawber, as he\
went out.\
\
\'91My dear Master Copperfield,\'92 she replied, \'91we went to Plymouth.\'92\
\
\'91To be on the spot,\'92 I hinted.\
\
\'91Just so,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber. \'91To be on the spot. But, the truth is,\
talent is not wanted in the Custom House. The local influence of my\
family was quite unavailing to obtain any employment in that department,\
for a man of Mr. Micawber\'92s abilities. They would rather NOT have a man\
of Mr. Micawber\'92s abilities. He would only show the deficiency of the\
others. Apart from which,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, \'91I will not disguise\
from you, my dear Master Copperfield, that when that branch of my\
family which is settled in Plymouth, became aware that Mr. Micawber was\
accompanied by myself, and by little Wilkins and his sister, and by the\
twins, they did not receive him with that ardour which he might have\
expected, being so newly released from captivity. In fact,\'92 said Mrs.\
Micawber, lowering her voice,--\'91this is between ourselves--our reception\
was cool.\'92\
\
\'91Dear me!\'92 I said.\
\
\'91Yes,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber. \'91It is truly painful to contemplate mankind\
in such an aspect, Master Copperfield, but our reception was, decidedly,\
cool. There is no doubt about it. In fact, that branch of my family\
which is settled in Plymouth became quite personal to Mr. Micawber,\
before we had been there a week.\'92\
\
I said, and thought, that they ought to be ashamed of themselves.\
\
\'91Still, so it was,\'92 continued Mrs. Micawber. \'91Under such circumstances,\
what could a man of Mr. Micawber\'92s spirit do? But one obvious course\
was left. To borrow, of that branch of my family, the money to return to\
London, and to return at any sacrifice.\'92\
\
\'91Then you all came back again, ma\'92am?\'92 I said.\
\
\'91We all came back again,\'92 replied Mrs. Micawber. \'91Since then, I have\
consulted other branches of my family on the course which it is most\
expedient for Mr. Micawber to take--for I maintain that he must take\
some course, Master Copperfield,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber, argumentatively.\
\'91It is clear that a family of six, not including a domestic, cannot live\
upon air.\'92\
\
\'91Certainly, ma\'92am,\'92 said I.\
\
\'91The opinion of those other branches of my family,\'92 pursued Mrs.\
Micawber, \'91is, that Mr. Micawber should immediately turn his attention\
to coals.\'92\
\
\'91To what, ma\'92am?\'92\
\
\'91To coals,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber. \'91To the coal trade. Mr. Micawber was\
induced to think, on inquiry, that there might be an opening for a\
man of his talent in the Medway Coal Trade. Then, as Mr. Micawber very\
properly said, the first step to be taken clearly was, to come and see\
the Medway. Which we came and saw. I say \'93we\'94, Master Copperfield; for\
I never will,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber with emotion, \'91I never will desert Mr.\
Micawber.\'92\
\
I murmured my admiration and approbation.\
\
\'91We came,\'92 repeated Mrs. Micawber, \'91and saw the Medway. My opinion of\
the coal trade on that river is, that it may require talent, but that\
it certainly requires capital. Talent, Mr. Micawber has; capital, Mr.\
Micawber has not. We saw, I think, the greater part of the Medway; and\
that is my individual conclusion. Being so near here, Mr. Micawber was\
of opinion that it would be rash not to come on, and see the Cathedral.\
Firstly, on account of its being so well worth seeing, and our never\
having seen it; and secondly, on account of the great probability of\
something turning up in a cathedral town. We have been here,\'92 said Mrs.\
Micawber, \'91three days. Nothing has, as yet, turned up; and it may\
not surprise you, my dear Master Copperfield, so much as it would a\
stranger, to know that we are at present waiting for a remittance from\
London, to discharge our pecuniary obligations at this hotel. Until the\
arrival of that remittance,\'92 said Mrs. Micawber with much feeling, \'91I am\
cut off from my home (I allude to lodgings in Pentonville), from my boy\
and girl, and from my twins.\'92\
\
I felt the utmost sympathy for Mr. and Mrs. Micawber in this anxious\
extremity, and said as much to Mr. Micawber, who now returned: adding\
that I only wished I had money enough, to lend them the amount they\
needed. Mr. Micawber\'92s answer expressed the disturbance of his mind. He\
said, shaking hands with me, \'91Copperfield, you are a true friend; but\
when the worst comes to the worst, no man is without a friend who is\
possessed of shaving materials.\'92 At this dreadful hint Mrs. Micawber\
threw her arms round Mr. Micawber\'92s neck and entreated him to be calm.\
He wept; but so far recovered, almost immediately, as to ring the bell\
for the waiter, and bespeak a hot kidney pudding and a plate of shrimps\
for breakfast in the morning.\
\
When I took my leave of them, they both pressed me so much to come and\
dine before they went away, that I could not refuse. But, as I knew I\
could not come next day, when I should have a good deal to prepare in\
the evening, Mr. Micawber arranged that he would call at Doctor Strong\'92s\
in the course of the morning (having a presentiment that the remittance\
would arrive by that post), and propose the day after, if it would suit\
me better. Accordingly I was called out of school next forenoon, and\
found Mr. Micawber in the parlour; who had called to say that the dinner\
would take place as proposed. When I asked him if the remittance had\
come, he pressed my hand and departed.\
\
As I was looking out of window that same evening, it surprised me, and\
made me rather uneasy, to see Mr. Micawber and Uriah Heep walk past, arm\
in arm: Uriah humbly sensible of the honour that was done him, and Mr.\
Micawber taking a bland delight in extending his patronage to Uriah. But\
I was still more surprised, when I went to the little hotel next day at\
the appointed dinner-hour, which was four o\'92clock, to find, from what\
Mr. Micawber said, that he had gone home with Uriah, and had drunk\
brandy-and-water at Mrs. Heep\'92s.\
\
\'91And I\'92ll tell you what, my dear Copperfield,\'92 said Mr. Micawber, \'91your\
friend Heep is a young fellow who might be attorney-general. If I had\
known that young man, at the period when my difficulties came to a\
crisis, all I can say is, that I believe my creditors would have been a\
great deal better managed than they were.\'92\
\
I hardly understood how this could have been, seeing that Mr. Micawber\
had paid them nothing at all as it was; but I did not like to\
ask. Neither did I like to say, that I hoped he had not been too\
communicative to Uriah; or to inquire if they had talked much about me.\
I was afraid of hurting Mr. Micawber\'92s feelings, or, at all events, Mrs.\
Micawber\'92s, she being very sensitive; but I was uncomfortable about it,\
too, and often thought about it afterwards.\
\
We had a beautiful little dinner. Quite an elegant dish of fish; the\
kidney-end of a loin of veal, roasted; fried sausage-meat; a partridge,\
and a pudding. There was wine, and there was strong ale; and after\
dinner Mrs. Micawber made us a bowl of hot punch with her own hands.\
\
Mr. Micawber was uncommonly convivial. I never saw him such good\
company. He made his face shine with the punch, so that it looked as if\
it had been varnished all over. He got cheerfully sentimental about\
the town, and proposed success to it; observing that Mrs. Micawber and\
himself had been made extremely snug and comfortable there and that he\
never should forget the agreeable hours they had passed in Canterbury.\
He proposed me afterwards; and he, and Mrs. Micawber, and I, took a\
review of our past acquaintance, in the course of which we sold the\
property all over again. Then I proposed Mrs. Micawber: or, at least,\
said, modestly, \'91If you\'92ll allow me, Mrs. Micawber, I shall now have\
the pleasure of drinking your health, ma\'92am.\'92 On which Mr. Micawber\
delivered an eulogium on Mrs. Micawber\'92s character, and said she\
had ever been his guide, philosopher, and friend, and that he would\
recommend me, when I came to a marrying time of life, to marry such\
another woman, if such another woman could be found.\
\
As the punch disappeared, Mr. Micawber became still more friendly and\
convivial. Mrs. Micawber\'92s spirits becoming elevated, too, we sang \'91Auld\
Lang Syne\'92. When we came to \'91Here\'92s a hand, my trusty frere\'92, we all\
joined hands round the table; and when we declared we would \'91take a\
right gude Willie Waught\'92, and hadn\'92t the least idea what it meant, we\
were really affected.\
\
In a word, I never saw anybody so thoroughly jovial as Mr. Micawber\
was, down to the very last moment of the evening, when I took a hearty\
farewell of himself and his amiable wife. Consequently, I was not\
prepared, at seven o\'92clock next morning, to receive the following\
communication, dated half past nine in the evening; a quarter of an hour\
after I had left him:--\
\
\'91My DEAR YOUNG FRIEND,\
\
\'91The die is cast--all is over. Hiding the ravages of care with a sickly\
mask of mirth, I have not informed you, this evening, that there is no\
hope of the remittance! Under these circumstances, alike humiliating to\
endure, humiliating to contemplate, and humiliating to relate, I have\
discharged the pecuniary liability contracted at this establishment,\
by giving a note of hand, made payable fourteen days after date, at\
my residence, Pentonville, London. When it becomes due, it will not be\
taken up. The result is destruction. The bolt is impending, and the tree\
must fall.\
\
\'91Let the wretched man who now addresses you, my dear Copperfield, be a\
beacon to you through life. He writes with that intention, and in that\
hope. If he could think himself of so much use, one gleam of day might,\
by possibility, penetrate into the cheerless dungeon of his remaining\
existence--though his longevity is, at present (to say the least of it),\
extremely problematical.\
\
\'91This is the last communication, my dear Copperfield, you will ever\
receive\
\
                         \'91From\
\
                              \'91The\
\
                                   \'91Beggared Outcast,\
\
                                        \'91WILKINS MICAWBER.\'92\
\
\
I was so shocked by the contents of this heart-rending letter, that I\
ran off directly towards the little hotel with the intention of taking\
it on my way to Doctor Strong\'92s, and trying to soothe Mr. Micawber with\
a word of comfort. But, half-way there, I met the London coach with Mr.\
and Mrs. Micawber up behind; Mr. Micawber, the very picture of tranquil\
enjoyment, smiling at Mrs. Micawber\'92s conversation, eating walnuts out\
of a paper bag, with a bottle sticking out of his breast pocket. As they\
did not see me, I thought it best, all things considered, not to\
see them. So, with a great weight taken off my mind, I turned into a\
by-street that was the nearest way to school, and felt, upon the whole,\
relieved that they were gone; though I still liked them very much,\
nevertheless.\
\
\
\
CHAPTER 18. A RETROSPECT\
\
\
My school-days! The silent gliding on of my existence--the unseen,\
unfelt progress of my life--from childhood up to youth! Let me think,\
as I look back upon that flowing water, now a dry channel overgrown with\
leaves, whether there are any marks along its course, by which I can\
remember how it ran.\
\
A moment, and I occupy my place in the Cathedral, where we all went\
together, every Sunday morning, assembling first at school for that\
purpose. The earthy smell, the sunless air, the sensation of the world\
being shut out, the resounding of the organ through the black and white\
arched galleries and aisles, are wings that take me back, and hold me\
hovering above those days, in a half-sleeping and half-waking dream.\
\
I am not the last boy in the school. I have risen in a few months, over\
several heads. But the first boy seems to me a mighty creature, dwelling\
afar off, whose giddy height is unattainable. Agnes says \'91No,\'92 but I say\
\'91Yes,\'92 and tell her that she little thinks what stores of knowledge have\
been mastered by the wonderful Being, at whose place she thinks I, even\
I, weak aspirant, may arrive in time. He is not my private friend\
and public patron, as Steerforth was, but I hold him in a reverential\
respect. I chiefly wonder what he\'92ll be, when he leaves Doctor Strong\'92s,\
and what mankind will do to maintain any place against him.\
\
But who is this that breaks upon me? This is Miss Shepherd, whom I love.\
\
Miss Shepherd is a boarder at the Misses Nettingalls\'92 establishment. I\
adore Miss Shepherd. She is a little girl, in a spencer, with a round\
face and curly flaxen hair. The Misses Nettingalls\'92 young ladies come to\
the Cathedral too. I cannot look upon my book, for I must look upon\
Miss Shepherd. When the choristers chaunt, I hear Miss Shepherd. In the\
service I mentally insert Miss Shepherd\'92s name--I put her in among the\
Royal Family. At home, in my own room, I am sometimes moved to cry out,\
\'91Oh, Miss Shepherd!\'92 in a transport of love.\
\
For some time, I am doubtful of Miss Shepherd\'92s feelings, but, at\
length, Fate being propitious, we meet at the dancing-school. I have\
Miss Shepherd for my partner. I touch Miss Shepherd\'92s glove, and feel a\
thrill go up the right arm of my jacket, and come out at my hair. I say\
nothing to Miss Shepherd, but we understand each other. Miss Shepherd\
and myself live but to be united.\
\
Why do I secretly give Miss Shepherd twelve Brazil nuts for a present, I\
wonder? They are not expressive of affection, they are difficult to pack\
into a parcel of any regular shape, they are hard to crack, even in\
room doors, and they are oily when cracked; yet I feel that they are\
appropriate to Miss Shepherd. Soft, seedy biscuits, also, I bestow upon\
Miss Shepherd; and oranges innumerable. Once, I kiss Miss Shepherd in\
the cloak-room. Ecstasy! What are my agony and indignation next day,\
when I hear a flying rumour that the Misses Nettingall have stood Miss\
Shepherd in the stocks for turning in her toes!\
\
Miss Shepherd being the one pervading theme and vision of my life, how\
do I ever come to break with her? I can\'92t conceive. And yet a coolness\
grows between Miss Shepherd and myself. Whispers reach me of Miss\
Shepherd having said she wished I wouldn\'92t stare so, and having avowed a\
preference for Master Jones--for Jones! a boy of no merit whatever! The\
gulf between me and Miss Shepherd widens. At last, one day, I meet the\
Misses Nettingalls\'92 establishment out walking. Miss Shepherd makes\
a face as she goes by, and laughs to her companion. All is over. The\
devotion of a life--it seems a life, it is all the same--is at an end;\
Miss Shepherd comes out of the morning service, and the Royal Family\
know her no more.\
\
I am higher in the school, and no one breaks my peace. I am not at all\
polite, now, to the Misses Nettingalls\'92 young ladies, and shouldn\'92t\
dote on any of them, if they were twice as many and twenty times as\
beautiful. I think the dancing-school a tiresome affair, and wonder why\
the girls can\'92t dance by themselves and leave us alone. I am growing\
great in Latin verses, and neglect the laces of my boots. Doctor Strong\
refers to me in public as a promising young scholar. Mr. Dick is wild\
with joy, and my aunt remits me a guinea by the next post.\
\
The shade of a young butcher rises, like the apparition of an armed head\
in Macbeth. Who is this young butcher? He is the terror of the youth\
of Canterbury. There is a vague belief abroad, that the beef suet with\
which he anoints his hair gives him unnatural strength, and that he is\
a match for a man. He is a broad-faced, bull-necked, young butcher, with\
rough red cheeks, an ill-conditioned mind, and an injurious tongue.\
His main use of this tongue, is, to disparage Doctor Strong\'92s young\
gentlemen. He says, publicly, that if they want anything he\'92ll give it\
\'91em. He names individuals among them (myself included), whom he could\
undertake to settle with one hand, and the other tied behind him. He\
waylays the smaller boys to punch their unprotected heads, and calls\
challenges after me in the open streets. For these sufficient reasons I\
resolve to fight the butcher.\
\
It is a summer evening, down in a green hollow, at the corner of a wall.\
I meet the butcher by appointment. I am attended by a select body of our\
boys; the butcher, by two other butchers, a young publican, and a sweep.\
The preliminaries are adjusted, and the butcher and myself stand face to\
face. In a moment the butcher lights ten thousand candles out of my left\
eyebrow. In another moment, I don\'92t know where the wall is, or where\
I am, or where anybody is. I hardly know which is myself and which the\
butcher, we are always in such a tangle and tussle, knocking about upon\
the trodden grass. Sometimes I see the butcher, bloody but confident;\
sometimes I see nothing, and sit gasping on my second\'92s knee; sometimes\
I go in at the butcher madly, and cut my knuckles open against his face,\
without appearing to discompose him at all. At last I awake, very queer\
about the head, as from a giddy sleep, and see the butcher walking off,\
congratulated by the two other butchers and the sweep and publican, and\
putting on his coat as he goes; from which I augur, justly, that the\
victory is his.\
\
I am taken home in a sad plight, and I have beef-steaks put to my eyes,\
and am rubbed with vinegar and brandy, and find a great puffy place\
bursting out on my upper lip, which swells immoderately. For three or\
four days I remain at home, a very ill-looking subject, with a green\
shade over my eyes; and I should be very dull, but that Agnes is a\
sister to me, and condoles with me, and reads to me, and makes the time\
light and happy. Agnes has my confidence completely, always; I tell her\
all about the butcher, and the wrongs he has heaped upon me; she thinks\
I couldn\'92t have done otherwise than fight the butcher, while she shrinks\
and trembles at my having fought him.\
\
Time has stolen on unobserved, for Adams is not the head-boy in the days\
that are come now, nor has he been this many and many a day. Adams has\
left the school so long, that when he comes back, on a visit to Doctor\
Strong, there are not many there, besides myself, who know him. Adams is\
going to be called to the bar almost directly, and is to be an advocate,\
and to wear a wig. I am surprised to find him a meeker man than I had\
thought, and less imposing in appearance. He has not staggered the world\
yet, either; for it goes on (as well as I can make out) pretty much the\
same as if he had never joined it.\
\
A blank, through which the warriors of poetry and history march on in\
stately hosts that seem to have no end--and what comes next! I am\
the head-boy, now! I look down on the line of boys below me, with a\
condescending interest in such of them as bring to my mind the boy I was\
myself, when I first came there. That little fellow seems to be no part\
of me; I remember him as something left behind upon the road of life--as\
something I have passed, rather than have actually been--and almost\
think of him as of someone else.\
\
And the little girl I saw on that first day at Mr. Wickfield\'92s, where\
is she? Gone also. In her stead, the perfect likeness of the picture,\
a child likeness no more, moves about the house; and Agnes--my sweet\
sister, as I call her in my thoughts, my counsellor and friend, the\
better angel of the lives of all who come within her calm, good,\
self-denying influence--is quite a woman.\
\
What other changes have come upon me, besides the changes in my growth\
and looks, and in the knowledge I have garnered all this while? I wear\
a gold watch and chain, a ring upon my little finger, and a long-tailed\
coat; and I use a great deal of bear\'92s grease--which, taken in\
conjunction with the ring, looks bad. Am I in love again? I am. I\
worship the eldest Miss Larkins.\
\
The eldest Miss Larkins is not a little girl. She is a tall, dark,\
black-eyed, fine figure of a woman. The eldest Miss Larkins is not a\
chicken; for the youngest Miss Larkins is not that, and the eldest must\
be three or four years older. Perhaps the eldest Miss Larkins may be\
about thirty. My passion for her is beyond all bounds.\
\
The eldest Miss Larkins knows officers. It is an awful thing to bear. I\
see them speaking to her in the street. I see them cross the way to meet\
her, when her bonnet (she has a bright taste in bonnets) is seen coming\
down the pavement, accompanied by her sister\'92s bonnet. She laughs and\
talks, and seems to like it. I spend a good deal of my own spare time in\
walking up and down to meet her. If I can bow to her once in the day (I\
know her to bow to, knowing Mr. Larkins), I am happier. I deserve a bow\
now and then. The raging agonies I suffer on the night of the Race Ball,\
where I know the eldest Miss Larkins will be dancing with the military,\
ought to have some compensation, if there be even-handed justice in the\
world.\
\
My passion takes away my appetite, and makes me wear my newest silk\
neckerchief continually. I have no relief but in putting on my best\
clothes, and having my boots cleaned over and over again. I seem, then,\
to be worthier of the eldest Miss Larkins. Everything that belongs to\
her, or is connected with her, is precious to me. Mr. Larkins (a gruff\
old gentleman with a double chin, and one of his eyes immovable in his\
head) is fraught with interest to me. When I can\'92t meet his daughter,\
I go where I am likely to meet him. To say \'91How do you do, Mr. Larkins?\
Are the young ladies and all the family quite well?\'92 seems so pointed,\
that I blush.\
\
I think continually about my age. Say I am seventeen, and say that\
seventeen is young for the eldest Miss Larkins, what of that? Besides,\
I shall be one-and-twenty in no time almost. I regularly take walks\
outside Mr. Larkins\'92s house in the evening, though it cuts me to the\
heart to see the officers go in, or to hear them up in the drawing-room,\
where the eldest Miss Larkins plays the harp. I even walk, on two or\
three occasions, in a sickly, spoony manner, round and round the house\
after the family are gone to bed, wondering which is the eldest Miss\
Larkins\'92s chamber (and pitching, I dare say now, on Mr. Larkins\'92s\
instead); wishing that a fire would burst out; that the assembled crowd\
would stand appalled; that I, dashing through them with a ladder, might\
rear it against her window, save her in my arms, go back for something\
she had left behind, and perish in the flames. For I am generally\
disinterested in my love, and think I could be content to make a figure\
before Miss Larkins, and expire.\
\
Generally, but not always. Sometimes brighter visions rise before me.\
When I dress (the occupation of two hours), for a great ball given at\
the Larkins\'92s (the anticipation of three weeks), I indulge my fancy with\
pleasing images. I picture myself taking courage to make a declaration\
to Miss Larkins. I picture Miss Larkins sinking her head upon my\
shoulder, and saying, \'91Oh, Mr. Copperfield, can I believe my ears!\'92 I\
picture Mr. Larkins waiting on me next morning, and saying, \'91My dear\
Copperfield, my daughter has told me all. Youth is no objection. Here\
are twenty thousand pounds. Be happy!\'92 I picture my aunt relenting,\
and blessing us; and Mr. Dick and Doctor Strong being present at the\
marriage ceremony. I am a sensible fellow, I believe--I believe,\
on looking back, I mean--and modest I am sure; but all this goes on\
notwithstanding. I repair to the enchanted house, where there are\
lights, chattering, music, flowers, officers (I am sorry to see), and\
the eldest Miss Larkins, a blaze of beauty. She is dressed in blue, with\
blue flowers in her hair--forget-me-nots--as if SHE had any need to wear\
forget-me-nots. It is the first really grown-up party that I have ever\
been invited to, and I am a little uncomfortable; for I appear not to\
belong to anybody, and nobody appears to have anything to say to me,\
except Mr. Larkins, who asks me how my schoolfellows are, which he\
needn\'92t do, as I have not come there to be insulted.\
\
But after I have stood in the doorway for some time, and feasted my eyes\
upon the goddess of my heart, she approaches me--she, the eldest Miss\
Larkins!--and asks me pleasantly, if I dance?\
\
I stammer, with a bow, \'91With you, Miss Larkins.\'92\
\
\'91With no one else?\'92 inquires Miss Larkins.\
\
\'91I should have no pleasure in dancing with anyone else.\'92\
\
Miss Larkins laughs and blushes (or I think she blushes), and says,\
\'91Next time but one, I shall be very glad.\'92\
\
The time arrives. \'91It is a waltz, I think,\'92 Miss Larkins doubtfully\
observes, when I present myself. \'91Do you waltz? If not, Captain\
Bailey--\'92\
\
But I do waltz (pretty well, too, as it happens), and I take Miss\
Larkins out. I take her sternly from the side of Captain Bailey. He\
is wretched, I have no doubt; but he is nothing to me. I have been\
wretched, too. I waltz with the eldest Miss Larkins! I don\'92t know where,\
among whom, or how long. I only know that I swim about in space, with a\
blue angel, in a state of blissful delirium\
}