{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or\
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org\
\
\
Title: Pride and Prejudice\
\
Author: Jane Austen\
\
Posting Date: August 26, 2008 [EBook #1342]\
Release Date: June, 1998\
Last Updated: October 17, 2016\
\
Language: English\
\
Character set encoding: UTF-8\
\
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***\
\
\
\
\
Produced by Anonymous Volunteers\
\
\
\
\
\
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE\
\
By Jane Austen\
\
\
\
Chapter 1\
\
\
It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession\
of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.\
\
However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his\
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds\
of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property\
of some one or other of their daughters.\
\
\'93My dear Mr. Bennet,\'94 said his lady to him one day, \'93have you heard that\
Netherfield Park is let at last?\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.\
\
\'93But it is,\'94 returned she; \'93for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she\
told me all about it.\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet made no answer.\
\
\'93Do you not want to know who has taken it?\'94 cried his wife impatiently.\
\
\'93_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.\'94\
\
This was invitation enough.\
\
\'93Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken\
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came\
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much\
delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he\
is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to\
be in the house by the end of next week.\'94\
\
\'93What is his name?\'94\
\
\'93Bingley.\'94\
\
\'93Is he married or single?\'94\
\
\'93Oh! Single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or\
five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!\'94\
\
\'93How so? How can it affect them?\'94\
\
\'93My dear Mr. Bennet,\'94 replied his wife, \'93how can you be so tiresome! You\
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.\'94\
\
\'93Is that his design in settling here?\'94\
\
\'93Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he\
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as\
soon as he comes.\'94\
\
\'93I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may send\
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are\
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the\
party.\'94\
\
\'93My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but\
I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five\
grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.\'94\
\
\'93In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.\'94\
\
\'93But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into\
the neighbourhood.\'94\
\
\'93It is more than I engage for, I assure you.\'94\
\
\'93But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would\
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to\
go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no\
newcomers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to\
visit him if you do not.\'94\
\
\'93You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very\
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my\
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; though\
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.\'94\
\
\'93I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the\
others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so\
good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.\'94\
\
\'93They have none of them much to recommend them,\'94 replied he; \'93they are\
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of\
quickness than her sisters.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Bennet, how _can_ you abuse your own children in such a way? You\
take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion for my poor nerves.\'94\
\
\'93You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They\
are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration\
these last twenty years at least.\'94\
\
\'93Ah, you do not know what I suffer.\'94\
\
\'93But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four\
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.\'94\
\
\'93It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not\
visit them.\'94\
\
\'93Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them\
all.\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,\
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had\
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind\
was less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding,\
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented,\
she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her\
daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.\
\
\
\
Chapter 2\
\
\
Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He\
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring\
his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was\
paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following\
manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he\
suddenly addressed her with:\
\
\'93I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.\'94\
\
\'93We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes,\'94 said her mother\
resentfully, \'93since we are not to visit.\'94\
\
\'93But you forget, mamma,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93that we shall meet him at the\
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him.\'94\
\
\'93I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces\
of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion\
of her.\'94\
\
\'93No more have I,\'94 said Mr. Bennet; \'93and I am glad to find that you do\
not depend on her serving you.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but, unable to contain\
herself, began scolding one of her daughters.\
\
\'93Don\'92t keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven\'92s sake! Have a little\
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.\'94\
\
\'93Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,\'94 said her father; \'93she times\
them ill.\'94\
\
\'93I do not cough for my own amusement,\'94 replied Kitty fretfully. \'93When is\
your next ball to be, Lizzy?\'94\
\
\'93To-morrow fortnight.\'94\
\
\'93Aye, so it is,\'94 cried her mother, \'93and Mrs. Long does not come back\
till the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him,\
for she will not know him herself.\'94\
\
\'93Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce\
Mr. Bingley to _her_.\'94\
\
\'93Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him\
myself; how can you be so teasing?\'94\
\
\'93I honour your circumspection. A fortnight\'92s acquaintance is certainly\
very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a\
fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture somebody else will; and after all,\
Mrs. Long and her neices must stand their chance; and, therefore, as\
she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will\
take it on myself.\'94\
\
The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, \'93Nonsense,\
nonsense!\'94\
\
\'93What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?\'94 cried he. \'93Do\
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on\
them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,\
Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read\
great books and make extracts.\'94\
\
Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how.\
\
\'93While Mary is adjusting her ideas,\'94 he continued, \'93let us return to Mr.\
Bingley.\'94\
\
\'93I am sick of Mr. Bingley,\'94 cried his wife.\
\
\'93I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me that before? If\
I had known as much this morning I certainly would not have called\
on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we\
cannot escape the acquaintance now.\'94\
\
The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs.\
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of joy\
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the\
while.\
\
\'93How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should\
persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to\
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a\
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said a\
word about it till now.\'94\
\
\'93Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,\'94 said Mr. Bennet; and,\
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.\
\
\'93What an excellent father you have, girls!\'94 said she, when the door was\
shut. \'93I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;\
or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so\
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but\
for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_\
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next\
ball.\'94\
\
\'93Oh!\'94 said Lydia stoutly, \'93I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the\
youngest, I\'92m the tallest.\'94\
\
The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would\
return Mr. Bennet\'92s visit, and determining when they should ask him to\
dinner.\
\
\
\
Chapter 3\
\
\
Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five\
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her\
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him\
in various ways--with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and\
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at\
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,\
Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been\
delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely\
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly\
with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of\
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively\
hopes of Mr. Bingley\'92s heart were entertained.\
\
\'93If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,\'94\
 said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, \'93and all the others equally well\
married, I shall have nothing to wish for.\'94\
\
In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet\'92s visit, and sat about\
ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being\
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had\
heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more\
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper\
window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.\
\
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already\
had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her\
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley\
was obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unable\
to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite\
disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town\
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that\
he might be always flying about from one place to another, and never\
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears\
a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get\
a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley\
was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.\
The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the\
day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought only\
six with him from London--his five sisters and a cousin. And when\
the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five\
altogether--Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and\
another young man.\
\
Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant\
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,\
with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely\
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention\
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and\
the report which was in general circulation within five minutes\
after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen\
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he\
was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great\
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust\
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be\
proud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all\
his large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most\
forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared\
with his friend.\
\
Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal\
people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,\
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving\
one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for\
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced\
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being\
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in\
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.\
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man\
in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.\
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of\
his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his\
having slighted one of her daughters.\
\
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit\
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been\
standing near enough for her to hear a conversation between him and Mr.\
Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press his friend\
to join it.\
\
\'93Come, Darcy,\'94 said he, \'93I must have you dance. I hate to see you\
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better\
dance.\'94\
\
\'93I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am\
particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this\
it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not\
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to\
stand up with.\'94\
\
\'93I would not be so fastidious as you are,\'94 cried Mr. Bingley, \'93for a\
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in\
my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see\
uncommonly pretty.\'94\
\
\'93_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,\'94 said Mr.\
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.\
\
\'93Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one\
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I\
dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.\'94\
\
\'93Which do you mean?\'94 and turning round he looked for a moment at\
Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said:\
\'93She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; I am in no\
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted\
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her\
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.\'94\
\
Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth\
remained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the story,\
however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,\
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.\
\
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.\
Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield\
party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been\
distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as\
her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane\'92s\
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most\
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been\
fortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that they\
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good\
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they\
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With\
a book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a\
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised\
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife\'92s views on\
the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had a\
different story to hear.\
\
\'93Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet,\'94 as she entered the room, \'93we have had a most\
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.\
Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well\
she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with\
her twice! Only think of _that_, my dear; he actually danced with her\
twice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second\
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand\
up with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody\
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going\
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and\
asked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King,\
and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,\
and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_--\'94\
\
\'93If he had had any compassion for _me_,\'94 cried her husband impatiently,\
\'93he would not have danced half so much! For God\'92s sake, say no more of\
his partners. Oh that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!\'94\
\
\'93Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessively\
handsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life saw\
anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.\
Hurst\'92s gown--\'94\
\
Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any\
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch\
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some\
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.\
\
\'93But I can assure you,\'94 she added, \'93that Lizzy does not lose much by not\
suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at\
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring\
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very\
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my\
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 4\
\
\
When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in\
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very\
much she admired him.\
\
\'93He is just what a young man ought to be,\'94 said she, \'93sensible,\
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much\
ease, with such perfect good breeding!\'94\
\
\'93He is also handsome,\'94 replied Elizabeth, \'93which a young man ought\
likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.\'94\
\
\'93I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I\
did not expect such a compliment.\'94\
\
\'93Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between\
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What\
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help\
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman\
in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is\
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a\
stupider person.\'94\
\
\'93Dear Lizzy!\'94\
\
\'93Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.\
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable\
in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your\
life.\'94\
\
\'93I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak\
what I think.\'94\
\
\'93I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_\
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of\
others! Affectation of candour is common enough--one meets with it\
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take the\
good of everybody\'92s character and make it still better, and say nothing\
of the bad--belongs to you alone. And so you like this man\'92s sisters,\
too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when you\
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep\
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming\
neighbour in her.\'94\
\
Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at\
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more\
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister,\
and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she\
was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine\
ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the\
power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and\
conceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of the\
first private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand\
pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of\
associating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respect\
entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were of\
a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply\
impressed on their memories than that their brother\'92s fortune and their\
own had been acquired by trade.\
\
Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred\
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an\
estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and\
sometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now provided with a\
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those\
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the\
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to\
purchase.\
\
His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own; but,\
though he was now only established as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no\
means unwilling to preside at his table--nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had\
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider\
his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of\
age two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation\
to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for\
half-an-hour--was pleased with the situation and the principal\
rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it\
immediately.\
\
Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of\
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the\
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition\
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he\
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy\'92s regard, Bingley\
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion.\
In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means\
deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,\
reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were not\
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley\
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually\
giving offense.\
\
The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently\
characteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or\
prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive\
to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt\
acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not\
conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a\
collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for\
none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received\
either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty,\
but she smiled too much.\
\
Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admired\
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one\
whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore\
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by such\
commendation to think of her as he chose.\
\
\
\
Chapter 5\
\
\
Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets\
were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade\
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the\
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.\
The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a\
disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town;\
and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house\
about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge,\
where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and,\
unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all\
the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him\
supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By\
nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St.\
James\'92s had made him courteous.\
\
Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a\
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest\
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was\
Elizabeth\'92s intimate friend.\
\
That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over\
a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly\
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.\
\
\'93_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet with civil\
self-command to Miss Lucas. \'93_You_ were Mr. Bingley\'92s first choice.\'94\
\
\'93Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be\
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he\
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something\
about Mr. Robinson.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not\
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson\'92s asking him how he liked our Meryton\
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many\
pretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his\
answering immediately to the last question: \'91Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,\
beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.\'92\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed--that does seem as\
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.\'94\
\
\'93_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,\'94 said\
Charlotte. \'93Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,\
is he?--poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_.\'94\
\
\'93I beg you would not put it into Lizzy\'92s head to be vexed by his\
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite\
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he\
sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.\'94\
\
\'93Are you quite sure, ma\'92am?--is not there a little mistake?\'94 said Jane.\
\'93I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.\'94\
\
\'93Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he\
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry at\
being spoke to.\'94\
\
\'93Miss Bingley told me,\'94 said Jane, \'93that he never speaks much,\
unless among his intimate acquaintances. With _them_ he is remarkably\
agreeable.\'94\
\
\'93I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very\
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it\
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had\
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to\
the ball in a hack chaise.\'94\
\
\'93I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,\'94 said Miss Lucas, \'93but I\
wish he had danced with Eliza.\'94\
\
\'93Another time, Lizzy,\'94 said her mother, \'93I would not dance with _him_,\
if I were you.\'94\
\
\'93I believe, ma\'92am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.\'94\
\
\'93His pride,\'94 said Miss Lucas, \'93does not offend _me_ so much as pride\
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so\
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,\
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_\
to be proud.\'94\
\
\'93That is very true,\'94 replied Elizabeth, \'93and I could easily forgive\
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.\'94\
\
\'93Pride,\'94 observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her\
reflections, \'93is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have\
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human\
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us\
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some\
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different\
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may\
be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of\
ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.\'94\
\
\'93If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,\'94 cried a young Lucas, who came with\
his sisters, \'93I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of\
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day.\'94\
\
\'93Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,\'94 said Mrs.\
Bennet; \'93and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle\
directly.\'94\
\
The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she\
would, and the argument ended only with the visit.\
\
\
\
Chapter 6\
\
\
The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit\
was soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet\'92s pleasing manners grew on\
the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was\
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,\
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards\
the two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest\
pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment\
of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;\
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising in\
all probability from the influence of their brother\'92s admiration. It\
was generally evident whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her and\
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference\
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a\
way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it\
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane\
united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a\
uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions\
of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.\
\
\'93It may perhaps be pleasant,\'94 replied Charlotte, \'93to be able to impose\
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be\
so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill\
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and\
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in\
the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every\
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all\
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are\
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without\
encouragement. In nine cases out of ten a women had better show _more_\
affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he\
may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.\'94\
\
\'93But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I can\
perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not to\
discover it too.\'94\
\
\'93Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane\'92s disposition as you do.\'94\
\
\'93But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal\
it, he must find it out.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Jane\
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they\
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that\
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should\
therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his\
attention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for\
falling in love as much as she chooses.\'94\
\
\'93Your plan is a good one,\'94 replied Elizabeth, \'93where nothing is in\
question but the desire of being well married, and if I were determined\
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But\
these are not Jane\'92s feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet,\
she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its\
reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four\
dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,\
and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quite\
enough to make her understand his character.\'94\
\
\'93Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might\
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must\
remember that four evenings have also been spent together--and four\
evenings may do a great deal.\'94\
\
\'93Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they\
both like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any other\
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.\'94\
\
\'93Well,\'94 said Charlotte, \'93I wish Jane success with all my heart; and\
if she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a\
chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a\
twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If\
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or\
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the\
least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to\
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as\
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your\
life.\'94\
\
\'93You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not\
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.\'94\
\
Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley\'92s attentions to her sister, Elizabeth\
was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some\
interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely\
allowed her to be pretty; he had looked at her without admiration at the\
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no\
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardly\
had a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered\
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To\
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had\
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry\
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and\
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those\
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of\
this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who made\
himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough\
to dance with.\
\
He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing\
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so\
drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas\'92s, where a large party were\
assembled.\
\
\'93What does Mr. Darcy mean,\'94 said she to Charlotte, \'93by listening to my\
conversation with Colonel Forster?\'94\
\
\'93That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.\'94\
\
\'93But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I see\
what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by\
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.\'94\
\
On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have\
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such\
a subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she\
turned to him and said:\
\
\'93Did you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly\
well just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at\
Meryton?\'94\
\
\'93With great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a lady\
energetic.\'94\
\
\'93You are severe on us.\'94\
\
\'93It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased,\'94 said Miss Lucas. \'93I am going\
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.\'94\
\
\'93You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me\
to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken\
a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would\
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of\
hearing the very best performers.\'94 On Miss Lucas\'92s persevering, however,\
she added, \'93Very well, if it must be so, it must.\'94 And gravely glancing\
at Mr. Darcy, \'93There is a fine old saying, which everybody here is of\
course familiar with: \'91Keep your breath to cool your porridge\'92; and I\
shall keep mine to swell my song.\'94\
\
Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song\
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that\
she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her\
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in\
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always\
impatient for display.\
\
Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her\
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited\
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she\
had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with\
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the\
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by\
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who,\
with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in\
dancing at one end of the room.\
\
Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of\
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too\
much engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was\
his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:\
\
\'93What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There\
is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the first\
refinements of polished society.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst\
the less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance.\'94\
\
Sir William only smiled. \'93Your friend performs delightfully,\'94 he\
continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; \'93and I doubt\
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.\'94\
\
\'93You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do\
you often dance at St. James\'92s?\'94\
\
\'93Never, sir.\'94\
\
\'93Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?\'94\
\
\'93It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.\'94\
\
\'93You have a house in town, I conclude?\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy bowed.\
\
\'93I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fond\
of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of\
London would agree with Lady Lucas.\'94\
\
He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed\
to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was\
struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to\
her:\
\
\'93My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow\
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You\
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure when so much beauty is before you.\'94\
 And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy who, though\
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly\
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William:\
\
\'93Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you\
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of\
her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at\
all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.\
\
\'93You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny\
me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the\
amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us\
for one half-hour.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Darcy is all politeness,\'94 said Elizabeth, smiling.\
\
\'93He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza,\
we cannot wonder at his complaisance--for who would object to such a\
partner?\'94\
\
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not\
injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some\
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:\
\
\'93I can guess the subject of your reverie.\'94\
\
\'93I should imagine not.\'94\
\
\'93You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings\
in this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion.\
I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise--the\
nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What would\
I give to hear your strictures on them!\'94\
\
\'93Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more\
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure\
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.\'94\
\
Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he\
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.\
Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity:\
\
\'93Miss Elizabeth Bennet.\'94\
\
\'93Miss Elizabeth Bennet!\'94 repeated Miss Bingley. \'93I am all astonishment.\
How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray, when am I to wish you\
joy?\'94\
\
\'93That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady\'92s\
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love\
to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.\'94\
\
\'93Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is\
absolutely settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed;\
and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you.\'94\
\
He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to\
entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her\
that all was safe, her wit flowed long.\
\
\
\
Chapter 7\
\
\
Mr. Bennet\'92s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two\
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,\
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother\'92s\
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply\
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and\
had left her four thousand pounds.\
\
She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk to\
their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in\
London in a respectable line of trade.\
\
The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most\
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted\
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and\
to a milliner\'92s shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,\
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;\
their minds were more vacant than their sisters\'92, and when nothing\
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning\
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news\
the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some\
from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with\
news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the\
neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the\
headquarters.\
\
Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the most\
interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge\
of the officers\'92 names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a\
secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr.\
Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of\
felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and\
Mr. Bingley\'92s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation\
to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the\
regimentals of an ensign.\
\
After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.\
Bennet coolly observed:\
\
\'93From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two\
of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but\
I am now convinced.\'94\
\
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect\
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter,\
and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the\
next morning to London.\
\
\'93I am astonished, my dear,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, \'93that you should be so\
ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly\
of anybody\'92s children, it should not be of my own, however.\'94\
\
\'93If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.\'94\
\
\'93Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.\'94\
\
\'93This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I\
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must\
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly\
foolish.\'94\
\
\'93My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of\
their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will\
not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when\
I liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my\
heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,\
should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thought\
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William\'92s in\
his regimentals.\'94\
\
\'93Mamma,\'94 cried Lydia, \'93my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain\
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson\'92s as they did when they first\
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke\'92s library.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with\
a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited\
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet\'92s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was\
eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,\
\
\'93Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,\
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.\'94\
\
\'93It is from Miss Bingley,\'94 said Jane, and then read it aloud.\
\
\'93MY DEAR FRIEND,--\
\
\'93If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me,\
we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives,\
for a whole day\'92s tete-a-tete between two women can never end without a\
quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and the\
gentlemen are to dine with the officers.--Yours ever,\
\
\'93CAROLINE BINGLEY\'94\
\
\'93With the officers!\'94 cried Lydia. \'93I wonder my aunt did not tell us of\
_that_.\'94\
\
\'93Dining out,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, \'93that is very unlucky.\'94\
\
\'93Can I have the carriage?\'94 said Jane.\
\
\'93No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to\
rain; and then you must stay all night.\'94\
\
\'93That would be a good scheme,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93if you were sure that\
they would not offer to send her home.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley\'92s chaise to go to Meryton,\
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.\'94\
\
\'93I had much rather go in the coach.\'94\
\
\'93But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are\
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?\'94\
\
\'93They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.\'94\
\
\'93But if you have got them to-day,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93my mother\'92s purpose\
will be answered.\'94\
\
She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses\
were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her\
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a\
bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before\
it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was\
delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;\
Jane certainly could not come back.\
\
\'93This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!\'94 said Mrs. Bennet more than\
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the\
next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her\
contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield\
brought the following note for Elizabeth:\
\
\'93MY DEAREST LIZZY,--\
\
\'93I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be\
imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will not\
hear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr.\
Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been\
to me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much the\
matter with me.--Yours, etc.\'94\
\
\'93Well, my dear,\'94 said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note\
aloud, \'93if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she\
should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of\
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little trifling\
colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is\
all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.\'94\
\
Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though\
the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walking\
was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.\
\
\'93How can you be so silly,\'94 cried her mother, \'93as to think of such a\
thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get\
there.\'94\
\
\'93I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.\'94\
\
\'93Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,\'94 said her father, \'93to send for the\
horses?\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing\
when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.\'94\
\
\'93I admire the activity of your benevolence,\'94 observed Mary, \'93but every\
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,\
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.\'94\
\
\'93We will go as far as Meryton with you,\'94 said Catherine and Lydia.\
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off\
together.\
\
\'93If we make haste,\'94 said Lydia, as they walked along, \'93perhaps we may\
see something of Captain Carter before he goes.\'94\
\
In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one\
of the officers\'92 wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing\
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing\
over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last\
within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face\
glowing with the warmth of exercise.\
\
She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were\
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.\
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such\
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and\
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt\
for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their\
brother\'92s manners there was something better than politeness; there\
was good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr.\
Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the\
brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as\
to the occasion\'92s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was\
thinking only of his breakfast.\
\
Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss\
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not\
well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her\
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving\
alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed\
for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,\
however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them\
together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the\
extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended\
her.\
\
When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth\
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and\
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and having\
examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught\
a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;\
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice\
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head\
ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were\
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in\
fact, nothing to do elsewhere.\
\
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very\
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only\
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern\
in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer\
of the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present.\
Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to\
Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supply\
of clothes.\
\
\
\
Chapter 8\
\
\
At five o\'92clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six\
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then\
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the\
much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley\'92s, she could not make a very\
favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing\
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how\
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked\
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their\
indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored\
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.\
\
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could\
regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his\
attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling\
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the\
others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was\
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.\
Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to\
eat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found her to prefer a plain\
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.\
\
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley\
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were\
pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;\
she had no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the\
same, and added:\
\
\'93She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent\
walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really\
looked almost wild.\'94\
\
\'93She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very\
nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the\
country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep\
in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to\
hide it not doing its office.\'94\
\
\'93Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,\'94 said Bingley; \'93but this was\
all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably\
well when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite\
escaped my notice.\'94\
\
\'93_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure,\'94 said Miss Bingley; \'93and I am\
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your_ sister make such\
an exhibition.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly not.\'94\
\
\'93To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,\
above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean by\
it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,\
a most country-town indifference to decorum.\'94\
\
\'93It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,\'94 said\
Bingley.\
\
\'93I am afraid, Mr. Darcy,\'94 observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, \'93that\
this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.\'94\
\
\'93Not at all,\'94 he replied; \'93they were brightened by the exercise.\'94 A\
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again:\
\
\'93I have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a very\
sweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with\
such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is\
no chance of it.\'94\
\
\'93I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in\
Meryton.\'94\
\
\'93Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.\'94\
\
\'93That is capital,\'94 added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.\
\
\'93If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside,\'94 cried Bingley, \'93it\
would not make them one jot less agreeable.\'94\
\
\'93But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any\
consideration in the world,\'94 replied Darcy.\
\
To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their\
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of\
their dear friend\'92s vulgar relations.\
\
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on\
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.\
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till\
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and\
when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go\
downstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole\
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting\
them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the\
excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay\
below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.\
\
\'93Do you prefer reading to cards?\'94 said he; \'93that is rather singular.\'94\
\
\'93Miss Eliza Bennet,\'94 said Miss Bingley, \'93despises cards. She is a great\
reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.\'94\
\
\'93I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,\'94 cried Elizabeth; \'93I am\
_not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.\'94\
\
\'93In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,\'94 said Bingley; \'93and\
I hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well.\'94\
\
Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the\
table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her\
others--all that his library afforded.\
\
\'93And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own\
credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more\
than I ever looked into.\'94\
\
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those\
in the room.\
\
\'93I am astonished,\'94 said Miss Bingley, \'93that my father should have left\
so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at\
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!\'94\
\
\'93It ought to be good,\'94 he replied, \'93it has been the work of many\
generations.\'94\
\
\'93And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying\
books.\'94\
\
\'93I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as\
these.\'94\
\
\'93Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of\
that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be\
half as delightful as Pemberley.\'94\
\
\'93I wish it may.\'94\
\
\'93But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that\
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a\
finer county in England than Derbyshire.\'94\
\
\'93With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it.\'94\
\
\'93I am talking of possibilities, Charles.\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get\
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very\
little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew\
near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his\
eldest sister, to observe the game.\
\
\'93Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?\'94 said Miss Bingley; \'93will\
she be as tall as I am?\'94\
\
\'93I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet\'92s height, or\
rather taller.\'94\
\
\'93How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me\
so much. Such a countenance, such manners! And so extremely accomplished\
for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.\'94\
\
\'93It is amazing to me,\'94 said Bingley, \'93how young ladies can have patience\
to be so very accomplished as they all are.\'94\
\
\'93All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and\
net purses. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sure\
I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being\
informed that she was very accomplished.\'94\
\
\'93Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,\'94 said Darcy, \'93has\
too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no\
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very\
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I\
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my\
acquaintance, that are really accomplished.\'94\
\
\'93Nor I, I am sure,\'94 said Miss Bingley.\
\
\'93Then,\'94 observed Elizabeth, \'93you must comprehend a great deal in your\
idea of an accomplished woman.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! certainly,\'94 cried his faithful assistant, \'93no one can be really\
esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met\
with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,\
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides\
all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of\
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word\
will be but half-deserved.\'94\
\
\'93All this she must possess,\'94 added Darcy, \'93and to all this she must\
yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by\
extensive reading.\'94\
\
\'93I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.\
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.\'94\
\
\'93Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all\
this?\'94\
\
\'93I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and\
application, and elegance, as you describe united.\'94\
\
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her\
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who\
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with\
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all\
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the\
room.\
\
\'93Elizabeth Bennet,\'94 said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her,\
\'93is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the\
other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it\
succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.\'94\
\
\'93Undoubtedly,\'94 replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,\
\'93there is a meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend\
to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is\
despicable.\'94\
\
Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to\
continue the subject.\
\
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and\
that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones being sent for\
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could\
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most\
eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so\
unwilling to comply with their brother\'92s proposal; and it was settled\
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet\
were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters\
declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,\
however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better relief\
to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every\
attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.\
\
\
\
Chapter 9\
\
\
Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister\'92s room, and in the\
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the\
inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,\
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his\
sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a\
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her\
own judgement of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, and\
its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her\
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.\
\
Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been\
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was\
not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her\
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She\
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter\'92s proposal of being carried\
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think\
it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss\
Bingley\'92s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all\
attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes\
that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.\
\
\'93Indeed I have, sir,\'94 was her answer. \'93She is a great deal too ill to be\
moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass\
a little longer on your kindness.\'94\
\
\'93Removed!\'94 cried Bingley. \'93It must not be thought of. My sister, I am\
sure, will not hear of her removal.\'94\
\
\'93You may depend upon it, Madam,\'94 said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,\
\'93that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she\
remains with us.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.\
\
\'93I am sure,\'94 she added, \'93if it was not for such good friends I do not\
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers\
a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is\
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest\
temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are\
nothing to _her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a\
charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the\
country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it\
in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.\'94\
\
\'93Whatever I do is done in a hurry,\'94 replied he; \'93and therefore if I\
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five\
minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.\'94\
\
\'93That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,\'94 said Elizabeth.\
\
\'93You begin to comprehend me, do you?\'94 cried he, turning towards her.\
\
\'93Oh! yes--I understand you perfectly.\'94\
\
\'93I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen\
through I am afraid is pitiful.\'94\
\
\'93That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricate\
character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.\'94\
\
\'93Lizzy,\'94 cried her mother, \'93remember where you are, and do not run on in\
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.\'94\
\
\'93I did not know before,\'94 continued Bingley immediately, \'93that you were a\
studier of character. It must be an amusing study.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at\
least that advantage.\'94\
\
\'93The country,\'94 said Darcy, \'93can in general supply but a few subjects for\
such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and\
unvarying society.\'94\
\
\'93But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be\
observed in them for ever.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, indeed,\'94 cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning\
a country neighbourhood. \'93I assure you there is quite as much of _that_\
going on in the country as in town.\'94\
\
Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,\
turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete\
victory over him, continued her triumph.\
\
\'93I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for\
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal\
pleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?\'94\
\
\'93When I am in the country,\'94 he replied, \'93I never wish to leave it;\
and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each their\
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.\'94\
\
\'93Aye--that is because you have the right disposition. But that\
gentleman,\'94 looking at Darcy, \'93seemed to think the country was nothing\
at all.\'94\
\
\'93Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken,\'94 said Elizabeth, blushing for her\
mother. \'93You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not\
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town,\
which you must acknowledge to be true.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting\
with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few\
neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.\'94\
\
Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his\
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towards\
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of\
saying something that might turn her mother\'92s thoughts, now asked her if\
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.\
\
\'93Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir\
William is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So\
genteel and easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_\
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very\
important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.\'94\
\
\'93Did Charlotte dine with you?\'94\
\
\'93No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For\
my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work;\
_my_ daughters are brought up very differently. But everybody is to\
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls,\
I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I think\
Charlotte so _very_ plain--but then she is our particular friend.\'94\
\
\'93She seems a very pleasant young woman.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself\
has often said so, and envied me Jane\'92s beauty. I do not like to boast\
of my own child, but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody\
better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own\
partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brother\
Gardiner\'92s in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law was\
sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he\
did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses\
on her, and very pretty they were.\'94\
\
\'93And so ended his affection,\'94 said Elizabeth impatiently. \'93There has\
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first\
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!\'94\
\
\'93I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love,\'94 said Darcy.\
\
\'93Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is\
strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I\
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.\'94\
\
Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth\
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to\
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.\
Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to\
Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was\
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be\
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part\
indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and\
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of\
her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to\
each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the\
youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming\
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.\
\
Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion\
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose\
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high\
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the\
attention of the officers, to whom her uncle\'92s good dinners, and her own\
easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was very\
equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and\
abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most\
shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this\
sudden attack was delightful to their mother\'92s ear:\
\
\'93I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when\
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of\
the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill.\'94\
\
Lydia declared herself satisfied. \'93Oh! yes--it would be much better to\
wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter\
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball,\'94 she\
added, \'93I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel\
Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned\
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations\'92 behaviour to the\
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,\
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of\
all Miss Bingley\'92s witticisms on _fine eyes_.\
\
\
\
Chapter 10\
\
\
The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss\
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who\
continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined\
their party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear.\
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching\
the progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by\
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and\
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.\
\
Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in\
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual\
commendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evenness\
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern\
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was\
exactly in union with her opinion of each.\
\
\'93How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!\'94\
\
He made no answer.\
\
\'93You write uncommonly fast.\'94\
\
\'93You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.\'94\
\
\'93How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a\
year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!\'94\
\
\'93It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.\'94\
\
\'93Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.\'94\
\
\'93I have already told her so once, by your desire.\'94\
\
\'93I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend\
pens remarkably well.\'94\
\
\'93Thank you--but I always mend my own.\'94\
\
\'93How can you contrive to write so even?\'94\
\
He was silent.\
\
\'93Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp;\
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful\
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss\
Grantley\'92s.\'94\
\
\'93Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At\
present I have not room to do them justice.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you\
always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?\'94\
\
\'93They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me\
to determine.\'94\
\
\'93It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with\
ease, cannot write ill.\'94\
\
\'93That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,\'94 cried her\
brother, \'93because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much for\
words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?\'94\
\
\'93My style of writing is very different from yours.\'94\
\
\'93Oh!\'94 cried Miss Bingley, \'93Charles writes in the most careless way\
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.\'94\
\
\'93My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them--by which\
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.\'94\
\
\'93Your humility, Mr. Bingley,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93must disarm reproof.\'94\
\
\'93Nothing is more deceitful,\'94 said Darcy, \'93than the appearance of\
humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an\
indirect boast.\'94\
\
\'93And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?\'94\
\
\'93The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in\
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of\
thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you\
think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with\
quickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without any\
attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.\
Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield\
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of\
panegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so very\
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business\
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?\'94\
\
\'93Nay,\'94 cried Bingley, \'93this is too much, to remember at night all the\
foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour,\
I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this\
moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless\
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.\'94\
\
\'93I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that\
you would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as\
dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were\
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, \'91Bingley, you had better\
stay till next week,\'92 you would probably do it, you would probably not\
go--and at another word, might stay a month.\'94\
\
\'93You have only proved by this,\'94 cried Elizabeth, \'93that Mr. Bingley did\
not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much\
more than he did himself.\'94\
\
\'93I am exceedingly gratified,\'94 said Bingley, \'93by your converting what my\
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am\
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means\
intend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such a\
circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I\
could.\'94\
\
\'93Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentions\
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak for\
himself.\'94\
\
\'93You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,\
but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to\
stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,\
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and\
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering\
one argument in favour of its propriety.\'94\
\
\'93To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit\
with you.\'94\
\
\'93To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of\
either.\'94\
\
\'93You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of\
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make\
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason\
one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have\
supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the\
circumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour\
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,\
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no\
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying\
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?\'94\
\
\'93Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to\
arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to\
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting\
between the parties?\'94\
\
\'93By all means,\'94 cried Bingley; \'93let us hear all the particulars, not\
forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have more\
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure\
you, that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with\
myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not\
know a more awful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in\
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,\
when he has nothing to do.\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was\
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly\
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her\
brother for talking such nonsense.\
\
\'93I see your design, Bingley,\'94 said his friend. \'93You dislike an argument,\
and want to silence this.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss\
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very\
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.\'94\
\
\'93What you ask,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.\
Darcy had much better finish his letter.\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.\
\
When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth\
for an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity\
to the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead\
the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she\
seated herself.\
\
Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed,\
Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books\
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy\'92s eyes were fixed\
on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of\
admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her\
because he disliked her, was still more strange. She could only imagine,\
however, at last that she drew his notice because there was something\
more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in\
any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked\
him too little to care for his approbation.\
\
After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by\
a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near\
Elizabeth, said to her:\
\
\'93Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an\
opportunity of dancing a reel?\'94\
\
She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some\
surprise at her silence.\
\
\'93Oh!\'94 said she, \'93I heard you before, but I could not immediately\
determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say \'91Yes,\'92\
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always\
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of\
their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell\
you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all--and now despise me if\
you dare.\'94\
\
\'93Indeed I do not dare.\'94\
\
Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his\
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her\
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy\
had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really\
believed, that were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he\
should be in some danger.\
\
Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her great\
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some\
assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.\
\
She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of\
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.\
\
\'93I hope,\'94 said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery\
the next day, \'93you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this\
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;\
and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running after\
officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to\
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,\
which your lady possesses.\'94\
\
\'93Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?\'94\
\
\'93Oh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Phillips be placed\
in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the\
judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different\
lines. As for your Elizabeth\'92s picture, you must not have it taken, for\
what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?\'94\
\
\'93It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their\
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be\
copied.\'94\
\
At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and\
Elizabeth herself.\
\
\'93I did not know that you intended to walk,\'94 said Miss Bingley, in some\
confusion, lest they had been overheard.\
\
\'93You used us abominably ill,\'94 answered Mrs. Hurst, \'93running away without\
telling us that you were coming out.\'94\
\
Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk\
by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,\
and immediately said:\
\
\'93This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the\
avenue.\'94\
\
But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,\
laughingly answered:\
\
\'93No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear\
to uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a\
fourth. Good-bye.\'94\
\
She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of\
being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered\
as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.\
\
\
\
Chapter 11\
\
\
When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her\
sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the\
drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many\
professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable\
as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.\
Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an\
entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh\
at their acquaintance with spirit.\
\
But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;\
Miss Bingley\'92s eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had\
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed\
himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also\
made her a slight bow, and said he was \'93very glad;\'94 but diffuseness\
and warmth remained for Bingley\'92s salutation. He was full of joy and\
attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she\
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire\
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further from\
the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone\
else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great\
delight.\
\
When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the\
card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.\
Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open\
petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and\
the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.\
Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the\
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;\
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets\
and rings, joined now and then in her brother\'92s conversation with Miss\
Bennet.\
\
Miss Bingley\'92s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.\
Darcy\'92s progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she\
was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She\
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her\
question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be\
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the\
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, \'93How pleasant\
it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no\
enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a\
book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not\
an excellent library.\'94\
\
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and\
cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearing\
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly\
towards him and said:\
\
\'93By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at\
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult\
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are\
not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a\
pleasure.\'94\
\
\'93If you mean Darcy,\'94 cried her brother, \'93he may go to bed, if he\
chooses, before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settled\
thing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall send\
round my cards.\'94\
\
\'93I should like balls infinitely better,\'94 she replied, \'93if they were\
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably\
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much\
more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of\
the day.\'94\
\
\'93Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be\
near so much like a ball.\'94\
\
Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked\
about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but\
Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In\
the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and,\
turning to Elizabeth, said:\
\
\'93Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a\
turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so\
long in one attitude.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley\
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked\
up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as\
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was\
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that\
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down\
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would\
interfere. \'93What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his\
meaning?\'94--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?\
\
\'93Not at all,\'94 was her answer; \'93but depend upon it, he means to be severe\
on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing\
about it.\'94\
\
Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in\
anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his\
two motives.\
\
\'93I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,\'94 said he, as soon\
as she allowed him to speak. \'93You either choose this method of passing\
the evening because you are in each other\'92s confidence, and have secret\
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures\
appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be\
completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much better\
as I sit by the fire.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! shocking!\'94 cried Miss Bingley. \'93I never heard anything so\
abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,\'94 said Elizabeth. \'93We\
can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate\
as you are, you must know how it is to be done.\'94\
\
\'93But upon my honour, I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has\
not yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of manner and presence of\
mind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will\
not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a\
subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!\'94 cried Elizabeth. \'93That is an\
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would\
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintances. I dearly love a\
laugh.\'94\
\
\'93Miss Bingley,\'94 said he, \'93has given me more credit than can be.\
The wisest and the best of men--nay, the wisest and best of their\
actions--may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in\
life is a joke.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly,\'94 replied Elizabeth--\'93there are such people, but I hope I\
am not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good.\
Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own,\
and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely\
what you are without.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study\
of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong\
understanding to ridicule.\'94\
\
\'93Such as vanity and pride.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real\
superiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation.\'94\
\
Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.\
\
\'93Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume,\'94 said Miss Bingley;\
\'93and pray what is the result?\'94\
\
\'93I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it\
himself without disguise.\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said Darcy, \'93I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,\
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch\
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding--certainly too little for the\
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others\
so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings\
are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper\
would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost\
forever.\'94\
\
\'93_That_ is a failing indeed!\'94 cried Elizabeth. \'93Implacable resentment\
_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I\
really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.\'94\
\
\'93There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular\
evil--a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.\'94\
\
\'93And _your_ defect is to hate everybody.\'94\
\
\'93And yours,\'94 he replied with a smile, \'93is willfully to misunderstand\
them.\'94\
\
\'93Do let us have a little music,\'94 cried Miss Bingley, tired of a\
conversation in which she had no share. \'93Louisa, you will not mind my\
waking Mr. Hurst?\'94\
\
Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was\
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments\'92 recollection, was not sorry for\
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.\
\
\
\
Chapter 12\
\
\
In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the\
next morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for\
them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on\
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which\
would exactly finish Jane\'92s week, could not bring herself to receive\
them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at\
least not to Elizabeth\'92s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.\
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage\
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley\
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them\
very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively\
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the\
contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,\
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley\'92s carriage immediately, and at\
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield\
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.\
\
The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was\
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work\
on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was\
then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike\
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.\
\
The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so\
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be\
safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where\
she felt herself to be right.\
\
To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence--Elizabeth had been at\
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked--and Miss\
Bingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teasing than usual to himself.\
He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration\
should _now_ escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope\
of influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an idea had been\
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight\
in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke\
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they were\
at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most\
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.\
\
On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost\
all, took place. Miss Bingley\'92s civility to Elizabeth increased at last\
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,\
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her\
to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most\
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of\
the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.\
\
They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet\
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much\
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their\
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really\
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The\
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of\
its animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and\
Elizabeth.\
\
They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human\
nature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new observations of\
threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information\
for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said\
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers\
had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been flogged, and it\
had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.\
\
\
\
Chapter 13\
\
\
\'93I hope, my dear,\'94 said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at\
breakfast the next morning, \'93that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,\
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.\'94\
\
\'93Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,\
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in--and I hope _my_ dinners\
are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.\'94\
\
\'93The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet\'92s eyes sparkled. \'93A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.\
Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr.\
Bingley. But--good Lord! how unlucky! There is not a bit of fish to be\
got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell--I must speak to Hill this\
moment.\'94\
\
\'93It is _not_ Mr. Bingley,\'94 said her husband; \'93it is a person whom I\
never saw in the whole course of my life.\'94\
\
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being\
eagerly questioned by his wife and his five daughters at once.\
\
After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:\
\
\'93About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight ago\
I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring\
early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead,\
may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! my dear,\'94 cried his wife, \'93I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.\
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing\
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own\
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago\
to do something or other about it.\'94\
\
Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. They\
had often attempted to do it before, but it was a subject on which\
Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail\
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of\
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.\
\
\'93It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,\'94 said Mr. Bennet, \'93and\
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.\
But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little\
softened by his manner of expressing himself.\'94\
\
\'93No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent of\
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false\
friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did\
before him?\'94\
\
\'93Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that\
head, as you will hear.\'94\
\
\'93Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15th October.\
\
\'93Dear Sir,--\
\
\'93The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured\
father always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the\
misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach; but\
for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might\
seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone\
with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.--\'91There, Mrs.\
Bennet.\'92--My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for having\
received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be\
distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de\
Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has\
preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be\
my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her\
ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which\
are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I\
feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in\
all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I\
flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable, and\
that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate\
will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the\
offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the\
means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for\
it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible\
amends--but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to\
receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting\
on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o\'92clock, and\
shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se\'92ennight\
following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine\
is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided\
that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.--I\
remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady and\
daughters, your well-wisher and friend,\
\
\'93WILLIAM COLLINS\'94\
\
\'93At four o\'92clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,\'94\
 said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. \'93He seems to be a most\
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will\
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so\
indulgent as to let him come to us again.\'94\
\
\'93There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if\
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to\
discourage him.\'94\
\
\'93Though it is difficult,\'94 said Jane, \'93to guess in what way he can mean\
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his\
credit.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady\
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying\
his parishioners whenever it were required.\
\
\'93He must be an oddity, I think,\'94 said she. \'93I cannot make him\
out.--There is something very pompous in his style.--And what can he\
mean by apologising for being next in the entail?--We cannot suppose he\
would help it if he could.--Could he be a sensible man, sir?\'94\
\
\'93No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the\
reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his\
letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him.\'94\
\
\'93In point of composition,\'94 said Mary, \'93the letter does not seem\
defective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I\
think it is well expressed.\'94\
\
To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any\
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should\
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had\
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for\
their mother, Mr. Collins\'92s letter had done away much of her ill-will,\
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which\
astonished her husband and daughters.\
\
Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great\
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the\
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in\
need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a\
tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and\
stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated\
before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of\
daughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but that in this\
instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did\
not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This\
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.\
Bennet, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily.\
\
\'93You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may\
prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so\
oddly.\'94\
\
\'93You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.\'94\
\
\'93Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you\
must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things\
I know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates\
will go when once they come to be entailed.\'94\
\
\'93I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and\
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing\
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come\
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps,\
when we are better acquainted--\'94\
\
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each\
other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins\'92s admiration. The\
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;\
and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet\'92s\
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his\
own future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; and\
he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency of its\
cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs. Bennet, who\
assured him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a\
good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He\
begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared\
herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a\
quarter of an hour.\
\
\
\
Chapter 14\
\
\
During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants\
were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his\
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to\
shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady\
Catherine de Bourgh\'92s attention to his wishes, and consideration for\
his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen\
better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him\
to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect\
he protested that \'93he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in\
a person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself\
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to\
approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of\
preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,\
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of\
quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many\
people he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.\
She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she\
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the\
neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or\
two, to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to\
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had\
once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly\
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed\
to suggest some herself--some shelves in the closet up stairs.\'94\
\
\'93That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, \'93and\
I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies\
in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?\'94\
\
\'93The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane\
from Rosings Park, her ladyship\'92s residence.\'94\
\
\'93I think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?\'94\
\
\'93She has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very\
extensive property.\'94\
\
\'93Ah!\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, \'93then she is better off than\
many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?\'94\
\
\'93She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself says\
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the\
handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks\
the young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly\
constitution, which has prevented her from making that progress in many\
accomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of, as I am\
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still\
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends\
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.\'94\
\
\'93Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at\
court.\'94\
\
\'93Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;\
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the\
British court of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleased\
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to\
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable\
to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that\
her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most\
elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by\
her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and\
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to\
pay.\'94\
\
\'93You judge very properly,\'94 said Mr. Bennet, \'93and it is happy for you\
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask\
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the\
moment, or are the result of previous study?\'94\
\
\'93They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I\
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant\
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to\
give them as unstudied an air as possible.\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet\'92s expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd\
as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,\
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,\
and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner\
in his pleasure.\
\
By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad\
to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over,\
glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily\
assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everything\
announced it to be from a circulating library), he started back, and\
begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at\
him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some\
deliberation he chose Fordyce\'92s Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the\
volume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three\
pages, she interrupted him with:\
\
\'93Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning away\
Richard; and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me\
so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more\
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.\'94\
\
Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.\
Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said:\
\
\'93I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books\
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes\
me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to\
them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.\'94\
\
Then turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at\
backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted\
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.\
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia\'92s\
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would\
resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his\
young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any\
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared\
for backgammon.\
\
\
\
Chapter 15\
\
\
Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had\
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part\
of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and\
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he\
had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful\
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had\
given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a\
good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in\
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected\
prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de\
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which\
he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,\
mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a\
clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of\
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.\
\
Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to\
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had\
a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found\
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.\
This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father\'92s\
estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and\
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own\
part.\
\
His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet\'92s lovely face\
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what\
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled\
choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a\
quarter of an hour\'92s tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a\
conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally\
to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at\
Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general\
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. \'93As to\
her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could\
not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession; her\
_eldest_ daughter, she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her\
to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.\'94\
\
Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon\
done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally\
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.\
\
Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have\
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of\
the day before was now high in her good graces.\
\
Lydia\'92s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sister\
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,\
at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,\
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed\
him after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with\
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.\
Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such\
doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been\
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told\
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the\
house, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore,\
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their\
walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker\
than a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large book, and go.\
\
In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his\
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of\
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes were\
immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and\
nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin in\
a shop window, could recall them.\
\
But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom\
they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking\
with another officer on the other side of the way. The officer was\
the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came\
to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the\
stranger\'92s air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia,\
determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under\
pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately\
had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had\
reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated\
permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with\
him the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a\
commission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the\
young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming.\
His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of\
beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address.\
The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness\
of conversation--a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and\
unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together\
very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy\
and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the\
ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and\
began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and\
Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to\
Longbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated\
it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes\
on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the\
stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they\
looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.\
Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham,\
after a few moments, touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just\
deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to\
imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.\
\
In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what\
passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.\
\
Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of\
Mr. Phillip\'92s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia\'92s\
pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of\
Mrs. Phillips\'92s throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the\
invitation.\
\
Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest,\
from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was\
eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as\
their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing\
about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones\'92s shop-boy in the\
street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to\
Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility\
was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane\'92s introduction of him. She\
received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with\
as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous\
acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself,\
however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who\
introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such an\
excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon\
put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom,\
however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that\
Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a\
lieutenant\'92s commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the\
last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr.\
Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the\
occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the\
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become \'93stupid,\
disagreeable fellows.\'94 Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses\
the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.\
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn\
would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillips\
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery\
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such\
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.\
Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured\
with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.\
\
As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass\
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either\
or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain\
such behaviour than her sister.\
\
Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring\
Mrs. Phillips\'92s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady\
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman;\
for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even\
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although\
utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be\
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so\
much attention in the whole course of his life.\
\
\
\
Chapter 16\
\
\
As no objection was made to the young people\'92s engagement with their\
aunt, and all Mr. Collins\'92s scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for\
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach\
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and\
the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,\
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle\'92s invitation, and was then in\
the house.\
\
When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.\
Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much\
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he\
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast\
parlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much\
gratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from him what\
Rosings was, and who was its proprietor--when she had listened to the\
description of only one of Lady Catherine\'92s drawing-rooms, and found\
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all\
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison\
with the housekeeper\'92s room.\
\
In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,\
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and\
the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the\
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive\
listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she\
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as\
soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,\
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine\
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the\
interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.\
The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,\
Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking\
of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.\
The officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,\
gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but\
Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and\
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips,\
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.\
\
Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was\
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated\
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into\
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feel\
that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered\
interesting by the skill of the speaker.\
\
With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the\
officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young\
ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind\
listener in Mrs. Phillips, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly\
supplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, he\
had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to whist.\
\
\'93I know little of the game at present,\'94 said he, \'93but I shall be glad\
to improve myself, for in my situation in life--\'94 Mrs. Phillips was very\
glad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.\
\
Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he\
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there\
seemed danger of Lydia\'92s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most\
determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,\
she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets\
and exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular.\
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore\
at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear\
him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be\
told--the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not\
even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly\
relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far\
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in\
a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.\
\
\'93About a month,\'94 said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject\
drop, added, \'93He is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I\
understand.\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 replied Mr. Wickham; \'93his estate there is a noble one. A clear\
ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more\
capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, for\
I have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my\
infancy.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.\
\
\'93You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after\
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting\
yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?\'94\
\
\'93As much as I ever wish to be,\'94 cried Elizabeth very warmly. \'93I have\
spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very\
disagreeable.\'94\
\
\'93I have no right to give _my_ opinion,\'94 said Wickham, \'93as to his being\
agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him\
too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_\
to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general\
astonish--and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly\
anywhere else. Here you are in your own family.\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word, I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in\
the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in\
Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find\
him more favourably spoken of by anyone.\'94\
\
\'93I cannot pretend to be sorry,\'94 said Wickham, after a short\
interruption, \'93that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond\
their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. The\
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his\
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.\'94\
\
\'93I should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an\
ill-tempered man.\'94 Wickham only shook his head.\
\
\'93I wonder,\'94 said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, \'93whether he is\
likely to be in this country much longer.\'94\
\
\'93I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when I\
was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will\
not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_\
wishes to avoid seeing _me_, he must go. We are not on friendly terms,\
and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for\
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense\
of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he\
is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men\
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never\
be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by\
a thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been\
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and\
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the\
memory of his father.\'94\
\
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with\
all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.\
\
Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the\
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that\
he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very\
intelligible gallantry.\
\
\'93It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,\'94 he added,\
\'93which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I knew it to be\
a most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted me\
further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great\
attentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them.\
Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and\
my spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.\
A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have\
now made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I\
was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in\
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we\
were speaking of just now.\'94\
\
\'93Indeed!\'94\
\
\'93Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best\
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.\
I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,\
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given\
elsewhere.\'94\
\
\'93Good heavens!\'94 cried Elizabeth; \'93but how could _that_ be? How could his\
will be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal redress?\'94\
\
\'93There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to\
give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the\
intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely\
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim\
to it by extravagance, imprudence--in short anything or nothing. Certain\
it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was\
of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no\
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done\
anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and\
I may have spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too freely. I can\
recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort\
of men, and that he hates me.\'94\
\
\'93This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.\'94\
\
\'93Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till I\
can forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_.\'94\
\
Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than\
ever as he expressed them.\
\
\'93But what,\'94 said she, after a pause, \'93can have been his motive? What can\
have induced him to behave so cruelly?\'94\
\
\'93A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but\
attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me\
less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father\'92s uncommon\
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had\
not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort\
of preference which was often given me.\'94\
\
\'93I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked\
him. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to be\
despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of\
descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as\
this.\'94\
\
After a few minutes\'92 reflection, however, she continued, \'93I _do_\
remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of\
his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His disposition\
must be dreadful.\'94\
\
\'93I will not trust myself on the subject,\'94 replied Wickham; \'93I can hardly\
be just to him.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, \'93To\
treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his\
father!\'94 She could have added, \'93A young man, too, like _you_, whose very\
countenance may vouch for your being amiable\'94--but she contented herself\
with, \'93and one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood,\
connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!\'94\
\
\'93We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest\
part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house,\
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_\
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips,\
appears to do so much credit to--but he gave up everything to be of\
use to the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of the\
Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most\
intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to\
be under the greatest obligations to my father\'92s active superintendence,\
and when, immediately before my father\'92s death, Mr. Darcy gave him a\
voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to\
be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_, as of his affection to myself.\'94\
\
\'93How strange!\'94 cried Elizabeth. \'93How abominable! I wonder that the very\
pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no better\
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest--for\
dishonesty I must call it.\'94\
\
\'93It _is_ wonderful,\'94 replied Wickham, \'93for almost all his actions may\
be traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It has\
connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are\
none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were stronger\
impulses even than pride.\'94\
\
\'93Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?\'94\
\
\'93Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his money\
freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the\
poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride--for he is very proud of what\
his father was--have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family,\
to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the\
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,\
which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and\
careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried up\
as the most attentive and best of brothers.\'94\
\
\'93What sort of girl is Miss Darcy?\'94\
\
He shook his head. \'93I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to\
speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother--very, very\
proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond\
of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is\
nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,\
and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father\'92s death, her\
home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her\
education.\'94\
\
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not\
help reverting once more to the first, and saying:\
\
\'93I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr. Bingley,\
who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,\
be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you\
know Mr. Bingley?\'94\
\
\'93Not at all.\'94\
\
\'93He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr.\
Darcy is.\'94\
\
\'93Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not\
want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth\
his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is\
a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His\
pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,\
sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable--allowing something\
for fortune and figure.\'94\
\
The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round\
the other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin\
Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual inquiries as to his success were\
made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every\
point; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon,\
he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least\
importance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged\
that she would not make herself uneasy.\
\
\'93I know very well, madam,\'94 said he, \'93that when persons sit down to a\
card-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily I\
am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There\
are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady\
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding\
little matters.\'94\
\
Mr. Wickham\'92s attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for\
a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation\
was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.\
\
\'93Lady Catherine de Bourgh,\'94 she replied, \'93has very lately given him\
a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her\
notice, but he certainly has not known her long.\'94\
\
\'93You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy\
were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.\'94\
\
\'93No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine\'92s\
connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before\
yesterday.\'94\
\
\'93Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is\
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.\'94\
\
This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss\
Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her\
affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already\
self-destined for another.\
\
\'93Mr. Collins,\'94 said she, \'93speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her\
daughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship,\
I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his\
patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.\'94\
\
\'93I believe her to be both in a great degree,\'94 replied Wickham; \'93I have\
not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked\
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the\
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe\
she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from\
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her\
nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an\
understanding of the first class.\'94\
\
Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and\
they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper\
put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.\
Wickham\'92s attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise\
of Mrs. Phillips\'92s supper party, but his manners recommended him to\
everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done\
gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could\
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all\
the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name\
as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia\
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the\
fish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of Mr. and\
Mrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses\
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing\
that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage\
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.\
\
\
\
Chapter 17\
\
\
Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr.\
Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; she\
knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.\
Bingley\'92s regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the\
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The\
possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to\
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be\
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,\
and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be\
otherwise explained.\
\
\'93They have both,\'94 said she, \'93been deceived, I dare say, in some way\
or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps\
misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to\
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,\
without actual blame on either side.\'94\
\
\'93Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say on\
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the\
business? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of\
somebody.\'94\
\
\'93Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my\
opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light\
it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father\'92s favourite in such\
a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is\
impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his\
character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so\
excessively deceived in him? Oh! no.\'94\
\
\'93I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley\'92s being imposed on, than\
that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me\
last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it\
be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his\
looks.\'94\
\
\'93It is difficult indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what to\
think.\'94\
\
\'93I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.\'94\
\
But Jane could think with certainty on only one point--that Mr. Bingley,\
if he _had_ been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair\
became public.\
\
The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this\
conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had\
been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal\
invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed\
for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their\
dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly\
asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To\
the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet\
as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to\
the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an\
activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if\
eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet\'92s civilities.\
\
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every\
female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in\
compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered\
by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a\
ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the\
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and\
Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.\
Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy\'92s look\
and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended\
less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they\
each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,\
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball\
was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she\
had no disinclination for it.\
\
\'93While I can have my mornings to myself,\'94 said she, \'93it is enough--I\
think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.\
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those\
who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for\
everybody.\'94\
\
Elizabeth\'92s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did\
not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking\
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley\'92s invitation, and if\
he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening\'92s\
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no\
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke\
either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to\
dance.\
\
\'93I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you,\'94 said he, \'93that a ball\
of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people,\
can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing\
myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair\
cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of\
soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially,\
a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right\
cause, and not to any disrespect for her.\'94\
\
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being\
engaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins\
instead! her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no help\
for it, however. Mr. Wickham\'92s happiness and her own were perforce\
delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins\'92s proposal accepted with as\
good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his\
gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first\
struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy\
of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a\
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.\
The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing\
civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a\
compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than\
gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before\
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage\
was extremely agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose\
to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the\
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and\
till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.\
\
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the\
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this\
time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there\
was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton\
once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after--the very\
shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have\
found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the\
improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than\
a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and\
Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.\
\
\
\
Chapter 18\
\
\
Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in\
vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a\
doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty\
of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that\
might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than\
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all\
that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than\
might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose\
the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy\'92s\
pleasure in the Bingleys\'92 invitation to the officers; and though\
this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was\
pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who\
told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the\
day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile,\
\'93I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if\
he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.\'94\
\
This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by\
Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for\
Wickham\'92s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every\
feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate\
disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to\
the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.\
Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She\
was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away\
with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in\
speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.\
\
But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect\
of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her\
spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had\
not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition\
to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular\
notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress;\
they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,\
apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being\
aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable\
partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release from\
him was ecstasy.\
\
She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of\
Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances\
were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with\
her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who took\
her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that,\
without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again\
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of\
mind; Charlotte tried to console her:\
\
\'93I dare say you will find him very agreeable.\'94\
\
\'93Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find\
a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an\
evil.\'94\
\
When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her\
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a\
simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant\
in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no\
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which\
she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and\
reading in her neighbours\'92 looks, their equal amazement in beholding\
it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to\
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at\
first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would\
be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made\
some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again\
silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time\
with:--\'93It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talked\
about the dance, and _you_ ought to make some sort of remark on the size\
of the room, or the number of couples.\'94\
\
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be\
said.\
\
\'93Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may\
observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But\
_now_ we may be silent.\'94\
\
\'93Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?\'94\
\
\'93Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be\
entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of\
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the\
trouble of saying as little as possible.\'94\
\
\'93Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you\
imagine that you are gratifying mine?\'94\
\
\'93Both,\'94 replied Elizabeth archly; \'93for I have always seen a great\
similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,\
taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say\
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to\
posterity with all the eclat of a proverb.\'94\
\
\'93This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,\'94\
 said he. \'93How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_\
think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.\'94\
\
\'93I must not decide on my own performance.\'94\
\
He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down\
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often\
walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist\
the temptation, added, \'93When you met us there the other day, we had just\
been forming a new acquaintance.\'94\
\
The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread his\
features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself\
for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a\
constrained manner said, \'93Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners\
as may ensure his _making_ friends--whether he may be equally capable of\
_retaining_ them, is less certain.\'94\
\
\'93He has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship,\'94 replied Elizabeth\
with emphasis, \'93and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all\
his life.\'94\
\
Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At\
that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass\
through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr.\
Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on\
his dancing and his partner.\
\
\'93I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such very\
superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the\
first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not\
disgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,\
especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing at\
her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then\
flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:--but let me not interrupt you, sir. You\
will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that\
young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.\'94\
\
The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir\
William\'92s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his\
eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and\
Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,\
he turned to his partner, and said, \'93Sir William\'92s interruption has made\
me forget what we were talking of.\'94\
\
\'93I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have\
interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves.\
We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we\
are to talk of next I cannot imagine.\'94\
\
\'93What think you of books?\'94 said he, smiling.\
\
\'93Books--oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same\
feelings.\'94\
\
\'93I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be\
no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.\'94\
\
\'93No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of\
something else.\'94\
\
\'93The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?\'94 said he,\
with a look of doubt.\
\
\'93Yes, always,\'94 she replied, without knowing what she said, for her\
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared\
by her suddenly exclaiming, \'93I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,\
that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was\
unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being\
created_.\'94\
\
\'93I am,\'94 said he, with a firm voice.\
\
\'93And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?\'94\
\
\'93I hope not.\'94\
\
\'93It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,\
to be secure of judging properly at first.\'94\
\
\'93May I ask to what these questions tend?\'94\
\
\'93Merely to the illustration of _your_ character,\'94 said she, endeavouring\
to shake off her gravity. \'93I am trying to make it out.\'94\
\
\'93And what is your success?\'94\
\
She shook her head. \'93I do not get on at all. I hear such different\
accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.\'94\
\
\'93I can readily believe,\'94 answered he gravely, \'93that reports may vary\
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were\
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to\
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.\'94\
\
\'93But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another\
opportunity.\'94\
\
\'93I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,\'94 he coldly replied.\
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in\
silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree,\
for in Darcy\'92s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards\
her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against\
another.\
\
They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, and\
with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:\
\
\'93So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham!\
Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand\
questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among\
his other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late\
Mr. Darcy\'92s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to\
give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy\'92s\
using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has\
always been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated\
Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but\
I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame, that he\
cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother\
thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to\
the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself\
out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent\
thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you,\
Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite\'92s guilt; but really,\
considering his descent, one could not expect much better.\'94\
\
\'93His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,\'94 said\
Elizabeth angrily; \'93for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse\
than of being the son of Mr. Darcy\'92s steward, and of _that_, I can\
assure you, he informed me himself.\'94\
\
\'93I beg your pardon,\'94 replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.\
\'93Excuse my interference--it was kindly meant.\'94\
\
\'93Insolent girl!\'94 said Elizabeth to herself. \'93You are much mistaken\
if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see\
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.\
Darcy.\'94 She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make\
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of\
such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently\
marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.\
Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for\
Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way\
before the hope of Jane\'92s being in the fairest way for happiness.\
\
\'93I want to know,\'94 said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her\
sister\'92s, \'93what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have\
been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case\
you may be sure of my pardon.\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 replied Jane, \'93I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing\
satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of\
his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have\
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,\
the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that\
Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has\
received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister\'92s,\
Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has\
been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy\'92s regard.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?\'94\
\
\'93No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.\'94\
\
\'93This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am\
satisfied. But what does he say of the living?\'94\
\
\'93He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard\
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to\
him _conditionally_ only.\'94\
\
\'93I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley\'92s sincerity,\'94 said Elizabeth warmly;\
\'93but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr.\
Bingley\'92s defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but\
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt\
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of\
both gentlemen as I did before.\'94\
\
She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on\
which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with\
delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr.\
Bingley\'92s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence\
in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew\
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last\
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,\
and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as\
to make a most important discovery.\
\
\'93I have found out,\'94 said he, \'93by a singular accident, that there is now\
in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the\
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of\
the house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady\
Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have\
thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de\
Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made\
in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to\
do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total\
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.\'94\
\
\'93You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!\'94\
\
\'93Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.\
I believe him to be Lady Catherine\'92s _nephew_. It will be in my power to\
assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se\'92nnight.\'94\
\
Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him\
that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction\
as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that\
it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either\
side; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in\
consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her\
with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she\
ceased speaking, replied thus:\
\
\'93My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in\
your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your\
understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide\
difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity,\
and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that\
I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with\
the highest rank in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of\
behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to\
follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to\
perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to\
profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant\
guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by\
education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young\
lady like yourself.\'94 And with a low bow he left her to attack Mr.\
Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose\
astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced\
his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of\
it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the\
words \'93apology,\'94 \'93Hunsford,\'94 and \'93Lady Catherine de Bourgh.\'94 It vexed\
her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him\
with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him time\
to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however,\
was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy\'92s contempt seemed\
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the\
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr.\
Collins then returned to Elizabeth.\
\
\'93I have no reason, I assure you,\'94 said he, \'93to be dissatisfied with my\
reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered\
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying\
that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine\'92s discernment as to be\
certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very\
handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.\'94\
\
As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned\
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the\
train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to,\
made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in\
that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection\
could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of\
endeavouring even to like Bingley\'92s two sisters. Her mother\'92s thoughts\
she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to\
venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to\
supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which\
placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find\
that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely,\
openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon\
be married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet\
seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the\
match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but\
three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and\
then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of\
Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as\
she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger\
daughters, as Jane\'92s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of\
other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be\
able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that\
she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was\
necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on\
such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.\
Bennet to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. She\
concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally\
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no\
chance of it.\
\
In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother\'92s\
words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible\
whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the\
chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her\
mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.\
\
\'93What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am\
sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say\
nothing _he_ may not like to hear.\'94\
\
\'93For heaven\'92s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you\
to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by\
so doing!\'94\
\
Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would\
talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and\
blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently\
glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what\
she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was\
convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression\
of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and\
steady gravity.\
\
At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who\
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no\
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and\
chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of\
tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and\
she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,\
preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent\
entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,\
but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of\
exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth\'92s\
eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her\
progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very\
ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks\
of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to\
favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.\
Mary\'92s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was\
weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at\
Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to\
Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs\
of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,\
imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his\
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,\
and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, \'93That will do\
extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other\
young ladies have time to exhibit.\'94\
\
Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and\
Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father\'92s speech, was afraid\
her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.\
\
\'93If I,\'94 said Mr. Collins, \'93were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I\
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an\
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly\
compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,\
to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time\
to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The\
rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make\
such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not\
offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time\
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care\
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making\
as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance\
that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody,\
especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit\
him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an\
occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the\
family.\'94 And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had\
been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared--many\
smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his\
wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly,\
and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably\
clever, good kind of young man.\
\
To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to\
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would\
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or\
finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister\
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his\
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he\
must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should\
have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough,\
and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the\
gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.\
\
The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by\
Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though\
he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her\
power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with\
somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.\
He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it;\
that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to\
her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her\
the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed\
her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and\
good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins\'92s conversation to herself.\
\
She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy\'92s further notice;\
though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite\
disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the\
probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in\
it.\
\
The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by\
a manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of\
an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how\
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her\
sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and\
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed\
every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw a\
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the\
long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his\
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and\
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said\
nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.\
Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the\
rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a\
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too\
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of \'93Lord,\
how tired I am!\'94 accompanied by a violent yawn.\
\
When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly\
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, and\
addressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy he\
would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without\
the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure,\
and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on\
her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next\
day for a short time.\
\
Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the\
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of\
settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly\
see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four\
months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thought\
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.\
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the\
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each\
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.\
\
\
\
Chapter 19\
\
\
The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his\
declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as\
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having\
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at\
the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the\
observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On\
finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together,\
soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:\
\
\'93May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,\
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the\
course of this morning?\'94\
\
Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.\
Bennet answered instantly, \'93Oh dear!--yes--certainly. I am sure Lizzy\
will be very happy--I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I\
want you up stairs.\'94 And, gathering her work together, she was hastening\
away, when Elizabeth called out:\
\
\'93Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse\
me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am\
going away myself.\'94\
\
\'93No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.\'94 And upon\
Elizabeth\'92s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to\
escape, she added: \'93Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing Mr.\
Collins.\'94\
\
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction--and a moment\'92s\
consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it\
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to\
conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between\
distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as\
they were gone, Mr. Collins began.\
\
\'93Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from\
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You\
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little\
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected\
mother\'92s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the\
purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to\
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as\
soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of\
my future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this\
subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons for\
marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design\
of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.\'94\
\
The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away\
with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could\
not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further,\
and he continued:\
\
\'93My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for\
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example\
of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it will\
add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly--which perhaps I ought\
to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and\
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling\
patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked\
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I\
left Hunsford--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was\
arranging Miss de Bourgh\'92s footstool, that she said, \'91Mr. Collins, you\
must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose\
a gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_, let her be an active,\
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small\
income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as\
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.\'92 Allow me, by the\
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice\
and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the\
advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond\
anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be\
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and\
respect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general\
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views\
were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I\
can assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that\
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured\
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy\
myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that\
the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy\
event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not\
be for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and\
I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing\
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the\
violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and\
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well\
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds\
in the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother\'92s\
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,\
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that\
no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.\'94\
\
It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.\
\
\'93You are too hasty, sir,\'94 she cried. \'93You forget that I have made no\
answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for\
the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of\
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to\
decline them.\'94\
\
\'93I am not now to learn,\'94 replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the\
hand, \'93that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the\
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their\
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even a\
third time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just\
said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word, sir,\'94 cried Elizabeth, \'93your hope is a rather\
extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not\
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so\
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second\
time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_\
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who\
could make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I\
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the\
situation.\'94\
\
\'93Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,\'94 said Mr. Collins\
very gravely--\'93but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all\
disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of\
seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your\
modesty, economy, and other amiable qualification.\'94\
\
\'93Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You\
must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment\
of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by\
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.\
In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your\
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn\
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may\
be considered, therefore, as finally settled.\'94 And rising as she\
thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus\
addressed her:\
\
\'93When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I\
shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given\
me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I\
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on\
the first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to\
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the\
female character.\'94\
\
\'93Really, Mr. Collins,\'94 cried Elizabeth with some warmth, \'93you puzzle me\
exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form\
of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as\
to convince you of its being one.\'94\
\
\'93You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your\
refusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My reasons for\
believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand is\
unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would\
be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections\
with the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are\
circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further\
consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no\
means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Your\
portion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undo\
the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must\
therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me,\
I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by\
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.\'94\
\
\'93I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind\
of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would\
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you\
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but\
to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect\
forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant\
female, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking\
the truth from her heart.\'94\
\
\'93You are uniformly charming!\'94 cried he, with an air of awkward\
gallantry; \'93and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express\
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of\
being acceptable.\'94\
\
To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make\
no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if\
he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering\
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered\
in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could\
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.\
\
\
\
Chapter 20\
\
\
Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his\
successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule\
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open\
the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she\
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in\
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins\
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then\
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result\
of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the\
refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow\
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.\
\
This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have been\
glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage\
him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,\
and could not help saying so.\
\
\'93But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins,\'94 she added, \'93that Lizzy shall be\
brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a very\
headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will\
_make_ her know it.\'94\
\
\'93Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,\'94 cried Mr. Collins; \'93but if\
she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would\
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who\
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she\
actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not\
to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of\
temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.\'94\
\
\'93Sir, you quite misunderstand me,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. \'93Lizzy is\
only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as\
good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and\
we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.\'94\
\
She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her\
husband, called out as she entered the library, \'93Oh! Mr. Bennet, you\
are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make\
Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if you\
do not make haste he will change his mind and not have _her_.\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them\
on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by\
her communication.\
\
\'93I have not the pleasure of understanding you,\'94 said he, when she had\
finished her speech. \'93Of what are you talking?\'94\
\
\'93Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,\
and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.\'94\
\
\'93And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.\'94\
\
\'93Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her\
marrying him.\'94\
\
\'93Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the\
library.\
\
\'93Come here, child,\'94 cried her father as she appeared. \'93I have sent for\
you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made\
you an offer of marriage. Is it true?\'94 Elizabeth replied that it was.\
\'93Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?\'94\
\
\'93I have, sir.\'94\
\
\'93Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your\
accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, or I will never see her again.\'94\
\
\'93An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must\
be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you\
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again\
if you _do_.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning,\
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the\
affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.\
\
\'93What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised me to\
_insist_ upon her marrying him.\'94\
\
\'93My dear,\'94 replied her husband, \'93I have two small favours to request.\
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the\
present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the\
library to myself as soon as may be.\'94\
\
Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did\
Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;\
coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane\
in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined\
interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and\
sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner\
varied, however, her determination never did.\
\
Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.\
He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives his cousin\
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other\
way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her\
deserving her mother\'92s reproach prevented his feeling any regret.\
\
While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend\
the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to\
her, cried in a half whisper, \'93I am glad you are come, for there is such\
fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has\
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.\'94\
\
Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,\
who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the\
breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on\
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating\
her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her\
family. \'93Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,\'94 she added in a melancholy tone,\
\'93for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used,\
nobody feels for my poor nerves.\'94\
\
Charlotte\'92s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.\
\
\'93Aye, there she comes,\'94 continued Mrs. Bennet, \'93looking as unconcerned\
as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided\
she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy--if you take it\
into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,\
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is\
to maintain you when your father is dead. I shall not be able to keep\
you--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told\
you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,\
and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking\
to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking\
to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have\
no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it\
is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.\'94\
\
Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that\
any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase the\
irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of\
them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with\
an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to\
the girls, \'93Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold\
your tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversation\
together.\'94\
\
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but\
Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,\
detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after\
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little\
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending\
not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projected\
conversation: \'93Oh! Mr. Collins!\'94\
\
\'93My dear madam,\'94 replied he, \'93let us be for ever silent on this point.\
Far be it from me,\'94 he presently continued, in a voice that marked his\
displeasure, \'93to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation\
to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a\
young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment;\
and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt\
of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand;\
for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as\
when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our\
estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect\
to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to\
your daughter\'92s favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the\
compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my\
behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my\
dismission from your daughter\'92s lips instead of your own. But we are all\
liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.\
My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due\
consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_\
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 21\
\
\
The discussion of Mr. Collins\'92s offer was now nearly at an end, and\
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily\
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of her\
mother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly\
expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her,\
but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke\
to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of\
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose\
civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and\
especially to her friend.\
\
The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet\'92s ill-humour or ill\
health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth\
had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did\
not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on\
Saturday, and to Saturday he meant to stay.\
\
After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham\
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.\
He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their\
aunt\'92s where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, was\
well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged\
that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.\
\
\'93I found,\'94 said he, \'93as the time drew near that I had better not meet\
Mr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so\
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes\
might arise unpleasant to more than myself.\'94\
\
She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full\
discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly\
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with\
them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to\
her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the\
compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an\
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.\
\
Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came\
from Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little,\
hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady\'92s fair, flowing hand; and\
Elizabeth saw her sister\'92s countenance change as she read it, and saw\
her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected\
herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usual\
cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety\
on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no\
sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane\
invited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their own room,\
Jane, taking out the letter, said:\
\
\'93This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a good\
deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on\
their way to town--and without any intention of coming back again. You\
shall hear what she says.\'94\
\
She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information\
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,\
and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a\
house. The next was in these words: \'93I do not pretend to regret anything\
I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend;\
but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that\
delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may\
lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved\
correspondence. I depend on you for that.\'94 To these highflown\
expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust;\
and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw\
nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their\
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley\'92s being there; and as\
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to\
regard it, in the enjoyment of his.\
\
\'93It is unlucky,\'94 said she, after a short pause, \'93that you should not be\
able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not\
hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks\
forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful\
intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater\
satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by\
them.\'94\
\
\'93Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into\
Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:\'94\
\
\'93When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which\
took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we\
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when\
Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have\
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend\
his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are\
already there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my\
dearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd--but of\
that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may\
abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your\
beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the\
three of whom we shall deprive you.\'94\
\
\'93It is evident by this,\'94 added Jane, \'93that he comes back no more this\
winter.\'94\
\
\'93It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he _should_.\'94\
\
\'93Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own\
master. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which\
particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth,\
_we_ are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think\
Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments;\
and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into\
something still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of\
her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before\
mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave the\
country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them\
unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have\
frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing;\
her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister\'92s\
partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most\
capable of engaging any woman\'92s heart. With all these circumstances to\
favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest\
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness\
of so many?\'94\
\
\'93What do you think of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?\'94 said Jane as she\
finished it. \'93Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare that\
Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is\
perfectly convinced of her brother\'92s indifference; and that if she\
suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to\
put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?\'94\
\
\'93Most willingly.\'94\
\
\'93You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is\
in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him\
to town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he\
does not care about you.\'94\
\
Jane shook her head.\
\
\'93Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you\
together can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. She\
is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr.\
Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the\
case is this: We are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she\
is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion\
that when there has been _one_ intermarriage, she may have less trouble\
in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and\
I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,\
my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley\
tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest\
degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on\
Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead\
of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.\'94\
\
\'93If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,\'94 replied Jane, \'93your\
representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the\
foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving\
anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving\
herself.\'94\
\
\'93That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you\
will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means.\
You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.\'94\
\
\'93But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in\
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry\
elsewhere?\'94\
\
\'93You must decide for yourself,\'94 said Elizabeth; \'93and if, upon mature\
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is\
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by\
all means to refuse him.\'94\
\
\'93How can you talk so?\'94 said Jane, faintly smiling. \'93You must know that\
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could\
not hesitate.\'94\
\
\'93I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider\
your situation with much compassion.\'94\
\
\'93But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be\
required. A thousand things may arise in six months!\'94\
\
The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost\
contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline\'92s\
interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those\
wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man\
so totally independent of everyone.\
\
She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt\
on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.\
Jane\'92s temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope,\
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that\
Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.\
\
They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the\
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman\'92s conduct;\
but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,\
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen\
to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After\
lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Mr.\
Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the\
conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had\
been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two\
full courses.\
\
\
\
Chapter 22\
\
\
The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the\
chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.\
Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. \'93It keeps him in good\
humour,\'94 said she, \'93and I am more obliged to you than I can express.\'94\
 Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and\
that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was\
very amiable, but Charlotte\'92s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth\
had any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her\
from any return of Mr. Collins\'92s addresses, by engaging them towards\
herself. Such was Miss Lucas\'92s scheme; and appearances were so\
favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost\
secure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very\
soon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his\
character, for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next\
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw\
himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,\
from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to\
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known\
till its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost\
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,\
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday.\
His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas\
perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and\
instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had\
she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.\
\
In as short a time as Mr. Collins\'92s long speeches would allow,\
everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as\
they entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name the day that\
was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must\
be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with\
his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must\
guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its\
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure\
and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that\
establishment were gained.\
\
Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;\
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins\'92s present\
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom\
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were\
exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more\
interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer\
Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided\
opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the\
Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife\
should make their appearance at St. James\'92s. The whole family, in short,\
were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes\
of _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have\
done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte\'92s\
dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had\
gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were\
in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible\
nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must\
be imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highly\
either of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it was\
the only provision for well-educated young women of small fortune,\
and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest\
preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at\
the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all\
the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business\
was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship\
she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder,\
and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be\
shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved\
to give her the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins,\
when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had\
passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very\
dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the\
curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct\
questions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was\
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to\
publish his prosperous love.\
\
As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the\
family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved\
for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality,\
said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, whenever\
his engagements might allow him to visit them.\
\
\'93My dear madam,\'94 he replied, \'93this invitation is particularly\
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and\
you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as\
possible.\'94\
\
They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for\
so speedy a return, immediately said:\
\
\'93But is there not danger of Lady Catherine\'92s disapprobation here, my\
good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of\
offending your patroness.\'94\
\
\'93My dear sir,\'94 replied Mr. Collins, \'93I am particularly obliged to you\
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so\
material a step without her ladyship\'92s concurrence.\'94\
\
\'93You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her\
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us\
again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,\
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.\'94\
\
\'93Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such\
affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive\
from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your\
regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, though\
my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now\
take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my\
cousin Elizabeth.\'94\
\
With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally\
surprised that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to\
understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her\
younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.\
She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there was\
a solidity in his reflections which often struck her, and though by no\
means so clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to read\
and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very\
agreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of this\
kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a\
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.\
\
The possibility of Mr. Collins\'92s fancying himself in love with her\
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but\
that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from\
possibility as she could encourage him herself, and her astonishment was\
consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and\
she could not help crying out:\
\
\'93Engaged to Mr. Collins! My dear Charlotte--impossible!\'94\
\
The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her\
story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a\
reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained\
her composure, and calmly replied:\
\
\'93Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible\
that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman\'92s good opinion,\
because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?\'94\
\
But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort\
for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of\
their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her\
all imaginable happiness.\
\
\'93I see what you are feeling,\'94 replied Charlotte. \'93You must be surprised,\
very much surprised--so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry\
you. But when you have had time to think it over, I hope you will be\
satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I never\
was. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins\'92s\
character, connection, and situation in life, I am convinced that my\
chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on\
entering the marriage state.\'94\
\
Elizabeth quietly answered \'93Undoubtedly;\'94 and after an awkward pause,\
they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much\
longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard.\
It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so\
unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins\'92s making two offers\
of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now\
accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte\'92s opinion of matrimony was\
not exactly like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possible\
that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better\
feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins was a\
most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herself\
and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it\
was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had\
chosen.\
\
\
\
Chapter 23\
\
\
Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what\
she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention\
it, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, to\
announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,\
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the\
houses, he unfolded the matter--to an audience not merely wondering, but\
incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness,\
protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and\
often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:\
\
\'93Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know\
that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?\'94\
\
Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne\
without anger such treatment; but Sir William\'92s good breeding carried\
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the\
truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the\
most forbearing courtesy.\
\
Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant\
a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by\
mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and\
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters\
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she\
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the\
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character\
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.\
\
Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while\
Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings\
found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving\
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins\
had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be\
happy together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two\
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that\
Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she\
herself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these two\
points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could\
console and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out her\
resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without\
scolding her, a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William\
or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she\
could at all forgive their daughter.\
\
Mr. Bennet\'92s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such\
as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for\
it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had\
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and\
more foolish than his daughter!\
\
Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she said\
less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;\
nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty\
and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a\
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news\
to spread at Meryton.\
\
Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort\
on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she\
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,\
though Mrs. Bennet\'92s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been\
enough to drive happiness away.\
\
Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them\
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that\
no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her\
disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her\
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could\
never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious,\
as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of his\
return.\
\
Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting\
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised\
letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to\
their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a\
twelvemonth\'92s abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging\
his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many\
rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection\
of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was\
merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready\
to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither\
he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine,\
he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to take\
place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable\
argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making him\
the happiest of men.\
\
Mr. Collins\'92s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of\
pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to\
complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come\
to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient\
and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house\
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the\
most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and\
they gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley\'92s continued\
absence.\
\
Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after\
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the\
report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to\
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.\
Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous\
falsehood.\
\
Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that\
his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as\
she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane\'92s happiness, and so\
dishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its\
frequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters\
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss\
Darcy and the amusements of London might be too much, she feared, for\
the strength of his attachment.\
\
As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more\
painful than Elizabeth\'92s, but whatever she felt she was desirous of\
concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject\
was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother,\
an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her\
impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he\
did not come back she would think herself very ill used. It needed\
all Jane\'92s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable\
tranquillity.\
\
Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his\
reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his\
first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;\
and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them\
from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by\
him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time\
to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.\
\
Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of\
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour,\
and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight\
of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she\
regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see\
them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and\
whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that\
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself\
and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. She\
complained bitterly of all this to her husband.\
\
\'93Indeed, Mr. Bennet,\'94 said she, \'93it is very hard to think that Charlotte\
Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced to\
make way for _her_, and live to see her take her place in it!\'94\
\
\'93My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for\
better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor.\'94\
\
This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead of\
making any answer, she went on as before.\
\
\'93I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was\
not for the entail, I should not mind it.\'94\
\
\'93What should not you mind?\'94\
\
\'93I should not mind anything at all.\'94\
\
\'93Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such\
insensibility.\'94\
\
\'93I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How\
anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one\'92s own\
daughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too!\
Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?\'94\
\
\'93I leave it to yourself to determine,\'94 said Mr. Bennet.\
\
\
\
Chapter 24\
\
\
Miss Bingley\'92s letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first\
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for\
the winter, and concluded with her brother\'92s regret at not having had\
time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left\
the country.\
\
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest\
of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the\
writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy\'92s praise occupied\
the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline\
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict\
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former\
letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother\'92s being an\
inmate of Mr. Darcy\'92s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of\
the latter with regard to new furniture.\
\
Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,\
heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern\
for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline\'92s\
assertion of her brother\'92s being partial to Miss Darcy she paid no\
credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she\
had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she\
could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness\
of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave\
of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happiness\
to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however,\
been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in\
whatever manner he thought best, but her sister\'92s was involved in it, as\
she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short,\
on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She\
could think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley\'92s regard had really\
died away, or were suppressed by his friends\'92 interference; whether\
he had been aware of Jane\'92s attachment, or whether it had escaped his\
observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be\
materially affected by the difference, her sister\'92s situation remained\
the same, her peace equally wounded.\
\
A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to\
Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet\'92s leaving them together, after a\
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could\
not help saying:\
\
\'93Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have no\
idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But\
I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall\
all be as we were before.\'94\
\
Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said\
nothing.\
\
\'93You doubt me,\'94 cried Jane, slightly colouring; \'93indeed, you have\
no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my\
acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear,\
and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not _that_ pain. A\
little time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better.\'94\
\
With a stronger voice she soon added, \'93I have this comfort immediately,\
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it\
has done no harm to anyone but myself.\'94\
\
\'93My dear Jane!\'94 exclaimed Elizabeth, \'93you are too good. Your sweetness\
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say\
to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you\
deserve.\'94\
\
Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back\
the praise on her sister\'92s warm affection.\
\
\'93Nay,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all the\
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want\
to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not\
be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your\
privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people\
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see\
of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms\
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the\
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or\
sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the\
other is Charlotte\'92s marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it is\
unaccountable!\'94\
\
\'93My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will\
ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference\
of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins\'92s respectability, and\
Charlotte\'92s steady, prudent character. Remember that she is one of a\
large family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and be\
ready to believe, for everybody\'92s sake, that she may feel something like\
regard and esteem for our cousin.\'94\
\
\'93To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else\
could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that\
Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her\
understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a\
conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as\
I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who married him\
cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though\
it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,\
change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade\
yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of\
danger security for happiness.\'94\
\
\'93I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,\'94 replied\
Jane; \'93and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happy\
together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You\
mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat\
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and\
saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy\
ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man\
to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but\
our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than\
it does.\'94\
\
\'93And men take care that they should.\'94\
\
\'93If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea\
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.\'94\
\
\'93I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley\'92s conduct to design,\'94\
 said Elizabeth; \'93but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others\
unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,\
want of attention to other people\'92s feelings, and want of resolution,\
will do the business.\'94\
\
\'93And do you impute it to either of those?\'94\
\
\'93Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what\
I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.\'94\
\
\'93You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, in conjunction with his friend.\'94\
\
\'93I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can\
only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman can\
secure it.\'94\
\
\'93Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his\
happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they\
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great\
connections, and pride.\'94\
\
\'93Beyond a doubt, they _do_ wish him to choose Miss Darcy,\'94 replied Jane;\
\'93but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have\
known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love\
her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely\
they should have opposed their brother\'92s. What sister would think\
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very\
objectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not try\
to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an\
affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most\
unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been\
mistaken--or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of what\
I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in\
the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley\'92s\
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.\
\
Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no\
more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account\
for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with\
less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she\
did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the\
effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her\
no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at\
the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet\'92s best\
comfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.\
\
Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. \'93So, Lizzy,\'94 said he one day,\
\'93your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next to\
being married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then.\
It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinction\
among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to\
be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough in\
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham\
be _your_ man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.\'94\
\
\'93Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not\
all expect Jane\'92s good fortune.\'94\
\
\'93True,\'94 said Mr. Bennet, \'93but it is a comfort to think that whatever of\
that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make\
the most of it.\'94\
\
Mr. Wickham\'92s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom\
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn\
family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now\
added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already\
heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,\
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was\
pleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they\
had known anything of the matter.\
\
Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be\
any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society\
of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for\
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody else\
Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.\
\
\
\
Chapter 25\
\
\
After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity,\
Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of\
Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his\
side, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as he had reason\
to hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day would\
be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of his\
relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his fair\
cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father another\
letter of thanks.\
\
On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving\
her brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmas\
at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly\
superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield\
ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived\
by trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so\
well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger\
than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant\
woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the\
two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard.\
They had frequently been staying with her in town.\
\
The first part of Mrs. Gardiner\'92s business on her arrival was to\
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was\
done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.\
Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They\
had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her\
girls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there was\
nothing in it.\
\
\'93I do not blame Jane,\'94 she continued, \'93for Jane would have got Mr.\
Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to think\
that she might have been Mr. Collins\'92s wife by this time, had it not\
been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,\
and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have\
a daughter married before I have, and that the Longbourn estate is just\
as much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed,\
sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of\
them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted\
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves\
before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the\
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of\
long sleeves.\'94\
\
Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before,\
in the course of Jane and Elizabeth\'92s correspondence with her, made her\
sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the\
conversation.\
\
When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. \'93It\
seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,\'94 said she. \'93I am\
sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such\
as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl\
for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets\
her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.\'94\
\
\'93An excellent consolation in its way,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93but it will not\
do for _us_. We do not suffer by _accident_. It does not often\
happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of\
independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in\
love with only a few days before.\'94\
\
\'93But that expression of \'91violently in love\'92 is so hackneyed, so\
doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as\
often applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour\'92s acquaintance,\
as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_ Mr. Bingley\'92s\
love?\'94\
\
\'93I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite\
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time\
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he\
offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance; and I\
spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be\
finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes!--of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor\
Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get\
over it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you\
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she\
would be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be\
of service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as\
anything.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded\
of her sister\'92s ready acquiescence.\
\
\'93I hope,\'94 added Mrs. Gardiner, \'93that no consideration with regard to\
this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of\
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go\
out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all,\
unless he really comes to see her.\'94\
\
\'93And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his\
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such\
a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may\
perhaps have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he\
would hardly think a month\'92s ablution enough to cleanse him from its\
impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley\
never stirs without him.\'94\
\
\'93So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane\
correspond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling.\'94\
\
\'93She will drop the acquaintance entirely.\'94\
\
But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this\
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley\'92s being\
withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which\
convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely\
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that\
his affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends\
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane\'92s\
attractions.\
\
Miss Bennet accepted her aunt\'92s invitation with pleasure; and the\
Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as she\
hoped by Caroline\'92s not living in the same house with her brother,\
she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of\
seeing him.\
\
The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses,\
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its\
engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment\
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family\
dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always\
made part of it--of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and\
on these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth\'92s\
warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them,\
from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference\
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and\
she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left\
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such\
an attachment.\
\
To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,\
unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,\
before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very\
part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many\
acquaintances in common; and though Wickham had been little there since\
the death of Darcy\'92s father, it was yet in his power to give her fresher\
intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of\
procuring.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by\
character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject\
of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute\
description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of\
praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both\
him and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy\'92s\
treatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman\'92s\
reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and\
was confident at last that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam\
Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.\
\
\
\
Chapter 26\
\
\
Mrs. Gardiner\'92s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given\
on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after\
honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:\
\
\'93You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because\
you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking\
openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve\
yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want\
of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against\
_him_; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he\
ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, you\
must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all\
expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and\
good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.\'94\
\
\'93My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.\'94\
\
\'93Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of\
myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I\
can prevent it.\'94\
\
\'93Elizabeth, you are not serious now.\'94\
\
\'93I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love with\
Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison,\
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to\
me--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence\
of it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father\'92s opinion of me does\
me the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My\
father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I\
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but\
since we see every day that where there is affection, young people\
are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into\
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many\
of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it\
would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is not\
to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first\
object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short,\
I will do my best.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very\
often. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.\'94\
\
\'93As I did the other day,\'94 said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: \'93very\
true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imagine\
that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been\
so frequently invited this week. You know my mother\'92s ideas as to the\
necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my\
honour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope\
you are satisfied.\'94\
\
Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for\
the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice\
being given on such a point, without being resented.\
\
Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted\
by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases,\
his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage was\
now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think\
it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that\
she \'93_wished_ they might be happy.\'94 Thursday was to be the wedding day,\
and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she\
rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother\'92s ungracious and\
reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her\
out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:\
\
\'93I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.\'94\
\
\'93_That_ you certainly shall.\'94\
\
\'93And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?\'94\
\
\'93We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.\'94\
\
\'93I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to\
come to Hunsford.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the\
visit.\
\
\'93My father and Maria are coming to me in March,\'94 added Charlotte, \'93and I\
hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as\
welcome as either of them.\'94\
\
The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from\
the church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to hear, on\
the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their\
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that\
it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never\
address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over,\
and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the\
sake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte\'92s first letters\
were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be\
curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would\
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to\
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte\
expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She\
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing\
which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and\
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine\'92s behaviour was most\
friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins\'92s picture of Hunsford and\
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait\
for her own visit there to know the rest.\
\
Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their\
safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it\
would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.\
\
Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience\
generally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or\
hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that\
her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been\
lost.\
\
\'93My aunt,\'94 she continued, \'93is going to-morrow into that part of the\
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.\'94\
\
She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.\
\'93I did not think Caroline in spirits,\'94 were her words, \'93but she was very\
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming\
to London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached\
her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much\
engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that\
Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit was\
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall\
see them soon here.\'94\
\
Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that\
accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister\'92s being in town.\
\
Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to\
persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be\
blind to Miss Bingley\'92s inattention. After waiting at home every morning\
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the\
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more,\
the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no\
longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will\
prove what she felt.\
\
\'93My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her\
better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have been\
entirely deceived in Miss Bingley\'92s regard for me. But, my dear sister,\
though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I\
still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was\
as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for\
wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to\
happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not\
return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I\
receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that\
she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not\
calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was\
in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was\
perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity,\
though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me out\
as she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on\
her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting\
wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the\
cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though _we_ know\
this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily\
account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to\
his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural and\
amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now,\
because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met, long ago.\
He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she said\
herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she\
wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I\
cannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should\
be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity\
in all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought,\
and think only of what will make me happy--your affection, and the\
invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very\
soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield\
again, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty. We had better\
not mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts\
from our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and\
Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.--Yours, etc.\'94\
\
This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she\
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.\
All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not\
even wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on\
every review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible\
advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr.\
Darcy\'92s sister, as by Wickham\'92s account, she would make him abundantly\
regret what he had thrown away.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise\
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth\
had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to\
herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,\
he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to\
see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.\
Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied\
with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune\
permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most\
remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself\
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than\
in Charlotte\'92s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.\
Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to\
suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was\
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very\
sincerely wish him happy.\
\
All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the\
circumstances, she thus went on: \'93I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that\
I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pure\
and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and\
wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial\
towards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find\
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to\
think her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My\
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a more\
interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in love\
with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.\
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take\
his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the\
ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that\
handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 27\
\
\
With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise\
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and\
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take\
Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of\
going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan\
and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure\
as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing\
Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There\
was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such\
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change\
was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her\
a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have\
been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,\
and was finally settled according to Charlotte\'92s first sketch. She was\
to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement\
of spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became\
perfect as plan could be.\
\
The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,\
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he\
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.\
\
The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on\
his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that\
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the\
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner\
of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of\
what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their\
opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there\
was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to\
him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that,\
whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable\
and pleasing.\
\
Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her\
think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a\
good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say\
that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much\
delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but\
she had known Sir William\'92s too long. He could tell her nothing new of\
the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were\
worn out, like his information.\
\
It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early\
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner\'92s\
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when\
they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,\
looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and\
lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,\
whose eagerness for their cousin\'92s appearance would not allow them to\
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen\
her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and\
kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and\
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.\
\
Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her\
sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to\
her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her\
spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however,\
to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the\
particulars also of Miss Bingley\'92s visit in Gracechurch Street, and\
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and\
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the\
acquaintance.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham\'92s desertion, and\
complimented her on bearing it so well.\
\
\'93But my dear Elizabeth,\'94 she added, \'93what sort of girl is Miss King? I\
should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.\'94\
\
\'93Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,\
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,\
and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,\
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get\
a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is\
mercenary.\'94\
\
\'93If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know\
what to think.\'94\
\
\'93She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.\'94\
\
\'93But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather\'92s death\
made her mistress of this fortune.\'94\
\
\'93No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_\
affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be for\
making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally\
poor?\'94\
\
\'93But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her\
so soon after this event.\'94\
\
\'93A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant\
decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,\
why should _we_?\'94\
\
\'93_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her being\
deficient in something herself--sense or feeling.\'94\
\
\'93Well,\'94 cried Elizabeth, \'93have it as you choose. _He_ shall be\
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.\'94\
\
\'93No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,\
to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in\
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not\
much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrow\
where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has\
neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones\
worth knowing, after all.\'94\
\
\'93Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.\'94\
\
Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the\
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in\
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.\
\
\'93We have not determined how far it shall carry us,\'94 said Mrs. Gardiner,\
\'93but, perhaps, to the Lakes.\'94\
\
No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her\
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. \'93Oh, my dear,\
dear aunt,\'94 she rapturously cried, \'93what delight! what felicity! You\
give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What\
are young men to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transport\
we shall spend! And when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other\
travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We\
_will_ know where we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen.\
Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our\
imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene,\
will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let _our_\
first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of\
travellers.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 28\
\
\
Every object in the next day\'92s journey was new and interesting to\
Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had\
seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,\
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.\
\
When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in\
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.\
The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth\
smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.\
\
At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the\
road, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the laurel hedge,\
everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte\
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate which\
led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of\
the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing\
at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the\
liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with\
coming when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw\
instantly that her cousin\'92s manners were not altered by his marriage;\
his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some\
minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her\
family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the\
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they\
were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious\
formality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife\'92s\
offers of refreshment.\
\
Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help\
in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its\
aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her,\
as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But\
though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to\
gratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder at\
her friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion.\
When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be\
ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned her\
eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but\
in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to\
admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to\
the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had\
happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the\
garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of\
which he attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his most\
respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance\
with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and\
owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way\
through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an\
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out\
with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the\
fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in\
the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which\
the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the\
prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered\
the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome\
modern building, well situated on rising ground.\
\
From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;\
but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white\
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte\
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,\
probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband\'92s\
help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything\
was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which\
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be\
forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by\
Charlotte\'92s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often\
forgotten.\
\
She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It\
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining\
in, observed:\
\
\'93Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine\
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will\
be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I\
doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice\
when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she\
will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she\
honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is\
charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed\
to walk home. Her ladyship\'92s carriage is regularly ordered for us. I\
_should_ say, one of her ladyship\'92s carriages, for she has several.\'94\
\
\'93Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed,\'94 added\
Charlotte, \'93and a most attentive neighbour.\'94\
\
\'93Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of\
woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.\'94\
\
The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news,\
and telling again what had already been written; and when it closed,\
Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon\
Charlotte\'92s degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,\
and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it\
was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit\
would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious\
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with\
Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.\
\
About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready\
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in\
confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running\
up stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened\
the door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with\
agitation, cried out--\
\
\'93Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for\
there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make\
haste, and come down this moment.\'94\
\
Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more,\
and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in\
quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the\
garden gate.\
\
\'93And is this all?\'94 cried Elizabeth. \'93I expected at least that the pigs\
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her\
daughter.\'94\
\
\'93La! my dear,\'94 said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, \'93it is not\
Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them;\
the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little\
creature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?\'94\
\
\'93She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.\
Why does she not come in?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours\
when Miss de Bourgh comes in.\'94\
\
\'93I like her appearance,\'94 said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. \'93She\
looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will\
make him a very proper wife.\'94\
\
Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation\
with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth\'92s high diversion, was\
stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness\
before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that\
way.\
\
At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and\
the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two\
girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which\
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked\
to dine at Rosings the next day.\
\
\
\
Chapter 29\
\
\
Mr. Collins\'92s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.\
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering\
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his\
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity\
of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady\
Catherine\'92s condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.\
\
\'93I confess,\'94 said he, \'93that I should not have been at all surprised by\
her ladyship\'92s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at\
Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it\
would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who\
could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there\
(an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately\
after your arrival!\'94\
\
\'93I am the less surprised at what has happened,\'94 replied Sir William,\
\'93from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which\
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such\
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.\'94\
\
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their\
visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what\
they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and\
so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.\
\
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth--\
\
\'93Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady\
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which\
becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on\
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion\
for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you\
for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank\
preserved.\'94\
\
While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different\
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much\
objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of\
her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas\
who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her\
introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done\
to his presentation at St. James\'92s.\
\
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a\
mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and\
Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such\
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but\
slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the\
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally\
cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.\
\
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria\'92s alarm was every\
moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.\
Elizabeth\'92s courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady\
Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or\
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thought\
she could witness without trepidation.\
\
From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a\
rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments, they\
followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady\
Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship,\
with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had\
settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should\
be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those\
apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.\
\
In spite of having been at St. James\'92s, Sir William was so completely\
awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage\
enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;\
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge\
of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself\
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her\
composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked\
features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not\
conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her\
visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by\
silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone,\
as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to\
Elizabeth\'92s mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she\
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.\
\
When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment\
she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the\
daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria\'92s astonishment at her\
being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any\
likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her\
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very\
little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance\
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening\
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before\
her eyes.\
\
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to\
admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,\
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth\
looking at in the summer.\
\
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants and\
all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had\
likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her\
ladyship\'92s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish\
nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted\
alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Sir\
William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law\
said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.\
But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and\
gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved\
a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth\
was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated\
between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in\
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all\
dinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little\
Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing\
she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the\
gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.\
\
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to\
be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any\
intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every\
subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used to\
have her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte\'92s domestic\
concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice as\
to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be\
regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the\
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was\
beneath this great lady\'92s attention, which could furnish her with an\
occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse\
with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and\
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew\
the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel,\
pretty kind of girl. She asked her, at different times, how many sisters\
she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of\
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they\
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been\
her mother\'92s maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of\
her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then\
observed,\
\
\'93Your father\'92s estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For your\
sake,\'94 turning to Charlotte, \'93I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no\
occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought\
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh\'92s family. Do you play and sing, Miss\
Bennet?\'94\
\
\'93A little.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our\
instrument is a capital one, probably superior to----You shall try it\
some day. Do your sisters play and sing?\'94\
\
\'93One of them does.\'94\
\
\'93Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss\
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do\
you draw?\'94\
\
\'93No, not at all.\'94\
\
\'93What, none of you?\'94\
\
\'93Not one.\'94\
\
\'93That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother\
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.\'94\
\
\'93My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.\'94\
\
\'93Has your governess left you?\'94\
\
\'93We never had any governess.\'94\
\
\'93No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home\
without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must\
have been quite a slave to your education.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not been\
the case.\
\
\'93Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, you\
must have been neglected.\'94\
\
\'93Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as\
wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to\
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be\
idle, certainly might.\'94\
\
\'93Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had\
known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage\
one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady\
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is\
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that\
way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces\
of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and\
it was but the other day that I recommended another young person,\
who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite\
delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalf\'92s\
calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. \'91Lady\
Catherine,\'92 said she, \'91you have given me a treasure.\'92 Are any of your\
younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, ma\'92am, all.\'94\
\
\'93All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The\
younger ones out before the elder ones are married! Your younger sisters\
must be very young?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to be\
much in company. But really, ma\'92am, I think it would be very hard upon\
younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and\
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to\
marry early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth\
as the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it would\
not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.\'94\
\
\'93Upon my word,\'94 said her ladyship, \'93you give your opinion very decidedly\
for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?\'94\
\
\'93With three younger sisters grown up,\'94 replied Elizabeth, smiling, \'93your\
ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.\'94\
\
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;\
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever\
dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.\
\
\'93You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need not\
conceal your age.\'94\
\
\'93I am not one-and-twenty.\'94\
\
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tables\
were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat\
down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the\
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her\
party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was\
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson\
expressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh\'92s being too hot or too cold, or\
having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the\
other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes\
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins\
was employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said, thanking her\
for every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many.\
Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes\
and noble names.\
\
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,\
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,\
gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gathered\
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were\
to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by\
the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.\
Collins\'92s side and as many bows on Sir William\'92s they departed. As soon\
as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin\
to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for\
Charlotte\'92s sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her\
commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy\
Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship\'92s praise\
into his own hands.\
\
\
\
Chapter 30\
\
\
Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was long\
enough to convince him of his daughter\'92s being most comfortably settled,\
and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not\
often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his\
morning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; but\
when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,\
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her\
cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast\
and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or in\
reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own book-room,\
which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.\
Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer\
the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a\
more pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent\
reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been\
much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and\
she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.\
\
From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and\
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went\
along, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,\
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened\
almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and\
had a few minutes\'92 conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever\
prevailed upon to get out.\
\
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and\
not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;\
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings\
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many\
hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship,\
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during\
these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,\
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement\
of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she\
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding\
out that Mrs. Collins\'92s joints of meat were too large for her family.\
\
Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in\
commission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistrate\
in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her\
by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to\
be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the\
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold\
them into harmony and plenty.\
\
The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;\
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one\
card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart\
of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living\
in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins\'92s reach. This,\
however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time\
comfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation with\
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year that she had\
often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she\
frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was\
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was\
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and\
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine\'92s curiosity.\
\
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.\
Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an\
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be\
important. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy was\
expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not\
many of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming would\
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and\
she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley\'92s designs on him\
were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently\
destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest\
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and\
seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by\
Miss Lucas and herself.\
\
His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking\
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,\
in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making his\
bow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the great\
intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his\
respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for\
Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of\
his uncle Lord ----, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when\
Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen\
them from her husband\'92s room, crossing the road, and immediately running\
into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:\
\
\'93I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would\
never have come so soon to wait upon me.\'94\
\
Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,\
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly\
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,\
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and\
address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been\
used to look in Hertfordshire--paid his compliments, with his usual\
reserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward her\
friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely\
curtseyed to him without saying a word.\
\
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the\
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but\
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and\
garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.\
At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of\
Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual\
way, and after a moment\'92s pause, added:\
\
\'93My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never\
happened to see her there?\'94\
\
She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see\
whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between\
the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as he\
answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The\
subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went\
away.\
\
\
\
Chapter 31\
\
\
Colonel Fitzwilliam\'92s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,\
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasures\
of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they\
received any invitation thither--for while there were visitors in the\
house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,\
almost a week after the gentlemen\'92s arrival, that they were honoured by\
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to\
come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little\
of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the\
Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seen\
only at church.\
\
The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined\
the party in Lady Catherine\'92s drawing-room. Her ladyship received\
them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so\
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,\
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,\
much more than to any other person in the room.\
\
Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was a\
welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins\'92s pretty friend had\
moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and\
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying\
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so\
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much\
spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself,\
as well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned\
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a\
while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not\
scruple to call out:\
\
\'93What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking\
of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.\'94\
\
\'93We are speaking of music, madam,\'94 said he, when no longer able to avoid\
a reply.\
\
\'93Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I\
must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music.\
There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment\
of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt,\
I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health\
had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performed\
delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister\'92s proficiency.\
\
\'93I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,\'94 said Lady\
Catherine; \'93and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel\
if she does not practice a good deal.\'94\
\
\'93I assure you, madam,\'94 he replied, \'93that she does not need such advice.\
She practises very constantly.\'94\
\
\'93So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write\
to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often\
tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without\
constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she\
will never play really well unless she practises more; and though Mrs.\
Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told\
her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.\
Jenkinson\'92s room. She would be in nobody\'92s way, you know, in that part\
of the house.\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt\'92s ill-breeding, and made\
no answer.\
\
When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having\
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He\
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then\
talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away\
from her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte\
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer\'92s\
countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first\
convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:\
\
\'93You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear\
me? I will not be alarmed though your sister _does_ play so well. There\
is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the\
will of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate\
me.\'94\
\
\'93I shall not say you are mistaken,\'94 he replied, \'93because you could not\
really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I have\
had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find\
great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are\
not your own.\'94\
\
Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to\
Colonel Fitzwilliam, \'93Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of\
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky\
in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a part\
of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of\
credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all\
that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me leave to\
say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such\
things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.\'94\
\
\'93I am not afraid of you,\'94 said he, smilingly.\
\
\'93Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,\'94 cried Colonel\
Fitzwilliam. \'93I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.\'94\
\
\'93You shall hear then--but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.\
The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know,\
was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced\
only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain\
knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a\
partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.\'94\
\
\'93I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly\
beyond my own party.\'94\
\
\'93True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel\
Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps,\'94 said Darcy, \'93I should have judged better, had I sought an\
introduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.\'94\
\
\'93Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?\'94 said Elizabeth, still\
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. \'93Shall we ask him why a man of sense and\
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend\
himself to strangers?\'94\
\
\'93I can answer your question,\'94 said Fitzwilliam, \'93without applying to\
him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.\'94\
\
\'93I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,\'94 said Darcy,\
\'93of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot\
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their\
concerns, as I often see done.\'94\
\
\'93My fingers,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93do not move over this instrument in the\
masterly manner which I see so many women\'92s do. They have not the same\
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I\
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I will not take the\
trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers as\
capable as any other woman\'92s of superior execution.\'94\
\
Darcy smiled and said, \'93You are perfectly right. You have employed your\
time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can\
think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.\'94\
\
Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know\
what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.\
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said\
to Darcy:\
\
\'93Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and\
could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion\
of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne\'92s. Anne would have\
been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.\'94\
\
Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his\
cousin\'92s praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she\
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss\
de Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have\
been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.\
\
Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth\'92s performance, mixing\
with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received\
them with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the\
gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship\'92s carriage was\
ready to take them all home.\
\
\
\
Chapter 32\
\
\
Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane\
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,\
when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a\
visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to\
be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her\
half-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions,\
when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and\
Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.\
\
He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his\
intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies were\
to be within.\
\
They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,\
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely\
necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence\
recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and\
feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty\
departure, she observed:\
\
\'93How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!\
It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you\
all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day\
before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?\'94\
\
\'93Perfectly so, I thank you.\'94\
\
She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short\
pause added:\
\
\'93I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever\
returning to Netherfield again?\'94\
\
\'93I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend\
very little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, and\
is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually\
increasing.\'94\
\
\'93If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for\
the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we\
might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did\
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as\
for his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the same\
principle.\'94\
\
\'93I should not be surprised,\'94 said Darcy, \'93if he were to give it up as\
soon as any eligible purchase offers.\'94\
\
Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his\
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the\
trouble of finding a subject to him.\
\
He took the hint, and soon began with, \'93This seems a very comfortable\
house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.\
Collins first came to Hunsford.\'94\
\
\'93I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her\
kindness on a more grateful object.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one\
of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made\
him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though\
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the\
wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a\
prudential light it is certainly a very good match for her.\'94\
\
\'93It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a\
distance of her own family and friends.\'94\
\
\'93An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.\'94\
\
\'93And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day\'92s\
journey. Yes, I call it a _very_ easy distance.\'94\
\
\'93I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_\
of the match,\'94 cried Elizabeth. \'93I should never have said Mrs. Collins\
was settled _near_ her family.\'94\
\
\'93It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond\
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.\'94\
\
As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she\
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and\
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered:\
\
\'93I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her\
family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many\
varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses of\
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the\
case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not\
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my\
friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_\
the present distance.\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, \'93_You_ cannot\
have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot have\
been always at Longbourn.\'94\
\
Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of\
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and\
glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:\
\
\'93Are you pleased with Kent?\'94\
\
A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side\
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte\
and her sister, just returned from her walk. The tete-a-tete surprised\
them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding\
on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying\
much to anybody, went away.\
\
\'93What can be the meaning of this?\'94 said Charlotte, as soon as he was\
gone. \'93My dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never\
have called us in this familiar way.\'94\
\
But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,\
even to Charlotte\'92s wishes, to be the case; and after various\
conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from\
the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable\
from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there\
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but gentlemen cannot\
always be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the\
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the\
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither\
almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes\
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their\
aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he\
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended\
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in\
being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of her\
former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw\
there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam\'92s manners,\
she believed he might have the best informed mind.\
\
But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult\
to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there\
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak,\
it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice\
to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really\
animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel\
Fitzwilliam\'92s occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was\
generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told\
her; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effect\
of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself\
seriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were at\
Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He\
certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that\
look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often\
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it\
seemed nothing but absence of mind.\
\
She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his\
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.\
Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of\
raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her\
opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend\'92s dislike would\
vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.\
\
\
In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying\
Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; he\
certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,\
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage\
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.\
\
\
\
Chapter 33\
\
\
More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,\
unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the\
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, to\
prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first that\
it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time,\
therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like\
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was\
not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,\
but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He\
never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking\
or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third\
rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--about\
her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her\
opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins\'92s happiness; and that in speaking of\
Rosings and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to\
expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying\
_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel\
Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must\
mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed\
her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the\
pales opposite the Parsonage.\
\
She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane\'92s last letter,\
and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in\
spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw\
on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the\
letter immediately and forcing a smile, she said:\
\
\'93I did not know before that you ever walked this way.\'94\
\
\'93I have been making the tour of the park,\'94 he replied, \'93as I generally\
do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are\
you going much farther?\'94\
\
\'93No, I should have turned in a moment.\'94\
\
And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage\
together.\
\
\'93Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?\'94 said she.\
\
\'93Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He\
arranges the business just as he pleases.\'94\
\
\'93And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least\
pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems\
more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.\'94\
\
\'93He likes to have his own way very well,\'94 replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.\
\'93But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it\
than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak\
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and\
dependence.\'94\
\
\'93In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of\
either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and\
dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going\
wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a fancy for?\'94\
\
\'93These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have\
experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater\
weight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where\
they like.\'94\
\
\'93Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often\
do.\'94\
\
\'93Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many\
in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to\
money.\'94\
\
\'93Is this,\'94 thought Elizabeth, \'93meant for me?\'94 and she coloured at the\
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, \'93And pray, what\
is the usual price of an earl\'92s younger son? Unless the elder brother is\
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.\'94\
\
He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt\
a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,\
she soon afterwards said:\
\
\'93I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of\
having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a\
lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well\
for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he\
likes with her.\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said Colonel Fitzwilliam, \'93that is an advantage which he must\
divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.\'94\
\
\'93Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does your\
charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a\
little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she\
may like to have her own way.\'94\
\
As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner\
in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to\
give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other\
got pretty near the truth. She directly replied:\
\
\'93You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare\
say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a\
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and\
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.\'94\
\
\'93I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man--he\
is a great friend of Darcy\'92s.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! yes,\'94 said Elizabeth drily; \'93Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.\
Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.\'94\
\
\'93Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him in\
those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in\
our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to\
him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that\
Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.\'94\
\
\'93What is it you mean?\'94\
\
\'93It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known,\
because if it were to get round to the lady\'92s family, it would be an\
unpleasant thing.\'94\
\
\'93You may depend upon my not mentioning it.\'94\
\
\'93And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be\
Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself\
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most\
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other\
particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing\
him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from\
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.\'94\
\
\'93Did Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?\'94\
\
\'93I understood that there were some very strong objections against the\
lady.\'94\
\
\'93And what arts did he use to separate them?\'94\
\
\'93He did not talk to me of his own arts,\'94 said Fitzwilliam, smiling. \'93He\
only told me what I have now told you.\'94\
\
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with\
indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she\
was so thoughtful.\
\
\'93I am thinking of what you have been telling me,\'94 said she. \'93Your\
cousin\'92s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?\'94\
\
\'93You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?\'94\
\
\'93I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his\
friend\'92s inclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was to\
determine and direct in what manner his friend was to be happy.\
But,\'94 she continued, recollecting herself, \'93as we know none of the\
particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposed\
that there was much affection in the case.\'94\
\
\'93That is not an unnatural surmise,\'94 said Fitzwilliam, \'93but it is a\
lessening of the honour of my cousin\'92s triumph very sadly.\'94\
\
This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a picture\
of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and\
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent\
matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,\
as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption\
of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other\
people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There\
could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have\
such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures\
taken to separate Bingley and Jane she had never doubted; but she had\
always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement\
of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, _he_ was\
the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had\
suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while\
every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the\
world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.\
\
\'93There were some very strong objections against the lady,\'94 were Colonel\
Fitzwilliam\'92s words; and those strong objections probably were, her\
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in\
business in London.\
\
\'93To Jane herself,\'94 she exclaimed, \'93there could be no possibility of\
objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!--her understanding\
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither\
could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some\
peculiarities, has abilities Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and\
respectability which he will probably never reach.\'94 When she thought of\
her mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow\
that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose\
pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of\
importance in his friend\'92s connections, than from their want of sense;\
and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governed\
by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr.\
Bingley for his sister.\
\
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a\
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to\
her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her\
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,\
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go and as much\
as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins\
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine\'92s being rather\
displeased by her staying at home.\
\
\
\
Chapter 34\
\
\
When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself\
as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the\
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her\
being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any\
revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.\
But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that\
cheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which,\
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly\
disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth\
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an\
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy\'92s\
shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her\
a keener sense of her sister\'92s sufferings. It was some consolation\
to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the\
next--and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should\
herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of\
her spirits, by all that affection could do.\
\
She could not think of Darcy\'92s leaving Kent without remembering that\
his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear\
that he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not\
mean to be unhappy about him.\
\
While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the\
door-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its\
being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in\
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.\
But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently\
affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the\
room. In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her\
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.\
She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and\
then getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but\
said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her\
in an agitated manner, and thus began:\
\
\'93In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be\
repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love\
you.\'94\
\
Elizabeth\'92s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured,\
doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement;\
and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her,\
immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides\
those of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on the\
subject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority--of\
its being a degradation--of the family obstacles which had always\
opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to\
the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his\
suit.\
\
In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to\
the compliment of such a man\'92s affection, and though her intentions did\
not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to\
receive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she\
lost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to\
answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with\
representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in spite\
of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and with\
expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of\
his hand. As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubt\
of a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but\
his countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance could\
only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into her\
cheeks, and she said:\
\
\'93In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to\
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however\
unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should\
be felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I\
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly\
bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to\
anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be\
of short duration. The feelings which, you tell me, have long prevented\
the acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in\
overcoming it after this explanation.\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed\
on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than\
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance\
of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the\
appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed\
himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth\'92s feelings\
dreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said:\
\
\'93And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting!\
I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at\
civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.\'94\
\
\'93I might as well inquire,\'94 replied she, \'93why with so evident a desire\
of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me\
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?\
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I have\
other provocations. You know I have. Had not my feelings decided against\
you--had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you\
think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has\
been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most\
beloved sister?\'94\
\
As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion\
was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she\
continued:\
\
\'93I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can\
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,\
you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only means\
of dividing them from each other--of exposing one to the censure of the\
world for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision for\
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest\
kind.\'94\
\
She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening\
with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.\
He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.\
\
\'93Can you deny that you have done it?\'94 she repeated.\
\
With assumed tranquillity he then replied: \'93I have no wish of denying\
that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your\
sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have been\
kinder than towards myself.\'94\
\
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,\
but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.\
\
\'93But it is not merely this affair,\'94 she continued, \'93on which my dislike\
is founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of you was\
decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received\
many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to\
say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?\
or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?\'94\
\
\'93You take an eager interest in that gentleman\'92s concerns,\'94 said Darcy,\
in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.\
\
\'93Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an\
interest in him?\'94\
\
\'93His misfortunes!\'94 repeated Darcy contemptuously; \'93yes, his misfortunes\
have been great indeed.\'94\
\
\'93And of your infliction,\'94 cried Elizabeth with energy. \'93You have reduced\
him to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You have\
withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for\
him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence\
which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this!\
and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and\
ridicule.\'94\
\
\'93And this,\'94 cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,\
\'93is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me!\
I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this\
calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,\'94 added he, stopping in\
his walk, and turning towards her, \'93these offenses might have been\
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the\
scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These\
bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater\
policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of\
my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by\
reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.\
Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and\
just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your\
connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whose\
condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?\'94\
\
Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to\
the utmost to speak with composure when she said:\
\
\'93You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your\
declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern\
which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more\
gentlemanlike manner.\'94\
\
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued:\
\
\'93You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way that\
would have tempted me to accept it.\'94\
\
Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an\
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on:\
\
\'93From the very beginning--from the first moment, I may almost say--of\
my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest\
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of\
the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of\
disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a\
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the\
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.\'94\
\
\'93You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your\
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.\
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best\
wishes for your health and happiness.\'94\
\
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him\
the next moment open the front door and quit the house.\
\
The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how\
to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for\
half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed,\
was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of\
marriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have been in love with her for\
so many months! So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of\
all the objections which had made him prevent his friend\'92s marrying\
her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his\
own case--was almost incredible! It was gratifying to have inspired\
unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable\
pride--his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to\
Jane--his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could\
not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr.\
Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon\
overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for\
a moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till the\
sound of Lady Catherine\'92s carriage made her feel how unequal she was to\
encounter Charlotte\'92s observation, and hurried her away to her room.\
\
\
\
Chapter 35\
\
\
Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations\
which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the\
surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anything\
else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after\
breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding\
directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy\'92s\
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,\
she turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. The\
park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one\
of the gates into the ground.\
\
After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was\
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and\
look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had\
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the\
verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk,\
when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which\
edged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr.\
Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now\
near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced\
her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though\
in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the\
gate. He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter,\
which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure,\
\'93I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you.\
Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?\'94 And then, with a\
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.\
\
With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,\
Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder,\
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written\
quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise\
full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated\
from Rosings, at eight o\'92clock in the morning, and was as follows:--\
\
\'93Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension\
of its containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those\
offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any\
intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes\
which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the\
effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,\
should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written\
and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand\
your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I\
demand it of your justice.\
\
\'93Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equal\
magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was,\
that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley\
from your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of various\
claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate\
prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and\
wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged\
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other\
dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect\
its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young\
persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could\
bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last\
night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope\
to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions\
and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which\
is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which\
may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity\
must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.\
\
\'93I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with\
others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young\
woman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the dance\
at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious\
attachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I\
had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir\
William Lucas\'92s accidental information, that Bingley\'92s attentions to\
your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage.\
He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could\
be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend\'92s behaviour\
attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss\
Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also\
watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever,\
but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced\
from the evening\'92s scrutiny, that though she received his attentions\
with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of\
sentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken here, _I_ must have been\
in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter\
probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict\
pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not\
scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister\'92s countenance and\
air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction\
that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be\
easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is\
certain--but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisions\
are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe\
her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial\
conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the\
marriage were not merely those which I last night acknowledged to have\
the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want of\
connection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me. But\
there were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still\
existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had\
myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before\
me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your\
mother\'92s family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that\
total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by\
herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your\
father. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern\
for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this\
representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to\
have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure,\
is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than\
it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only say\
farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties\
was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have led\
me before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy\
connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, as\
you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.\
\
\'93The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters\'92 uneasiness\
had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was\
soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in\
detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in\
London. We accordingly went--and there I readily engaged in the office\
of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I\
described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrance\
might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose\
that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been\
seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your\
sister\'92s indifference. He had before believed her to return his\
affection with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great\
natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on his\
own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was\
no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into\
Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the\
work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There\
is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not\
reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the\
measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister\'92s being in\
town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her\
brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without\
ill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to me\
enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this\
concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and it\
was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no\
other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister\'92s feelings, it\
was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to\
you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemn\
them.\
\
\'93With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured\
Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his\
connection with my family. Of what he has _particularly_ accused me I\
am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more\
than one witness of undoubted veracity.\
\
\'93Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many\
years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good\
conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to\
be of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his\
kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at\
school, and afterwards at Cambridge--most important assistance, as his\
own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have\
been unable to give him a gentleman\'92s education. My father was not only\
fond of this young man\'92s society, whose manners were always engaging; he\
had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be\
his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is\
many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different\
manner. The vicious propensities--the want of principle, which he was\
careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape\
the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself,\
and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr.\
Darcy could not have. Here again I shall give you pain--to what degree\
you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham\
has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from\
unfolding his real character--it adds even another motive.\
\
\'93My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to\
Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly\
recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner\
that his profession might allow--and if he took orders, desired that a\
valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There\
was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not long\
survive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mr. Wickham\
wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders,\
he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more\
immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he\
could not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying\
law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would\
be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believed\
him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to\
his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the\
business was therefore soon settled--he resigned all claim to assistance\
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to\
receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connection\
between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him\
to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town I believe he chiefly\
lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free\
from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation.\
For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the\
incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to\
me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured\
me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He\
had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely\
resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in\
question--of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was\
well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not\
have forgotten my revered father\'92s intentions. You will hardly blame\
me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every\
repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of\
his circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me\
to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every\
appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. But\
last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.\
\
\'93I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself,\
and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold\
to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your\
secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to\
the guardianship of my mother\'92s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself.\
About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formed\
for her in London; and last summer she went with the lady who presided\
over it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by\
design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him\
and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and\
by her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana,\
whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to\
her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and\
to consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her\
excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed\
the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two\
before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the\
idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as\
a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and\
how I acted. Regard for my sister\'92s credit and feelings prevented\
any public exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place\
immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr.\
Wickham\'92s chief object was unquestionably my sister\'92s fortune, which\
is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of\
revenging himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have\
been complete indeed.\
\
\'93This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have\
been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as\
false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr.\
Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he\
had imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered\
at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either,\
detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in\
your inclination.\
\
\'93You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; but\
I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to\
be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more\
particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our\
near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of\
the executors of my father\'92s will, has been unavoidably acquainted\
with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of _me_\
should make _my_ assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by\
the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be\
the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some\
opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the\
morning. I will only add, God bless you.\
\
\'93FITZWILLIAM DARCY\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 36\
\
\
If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to\
contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of\
its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerly\
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.\
Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did\
she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;\
and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation\
to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong\
prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what\
had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly\
left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the\
next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of\
the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister\'92s insensibility she\
instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst\
objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing\
him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied\
her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and\
insolence.\
\
But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--when\
she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which,\
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which\
bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her\
feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.\
Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished\
to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, \'93This must be false!\
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!\'94--and when she had\
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the\
last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not\
regard it, that she would never look in it again.\
\
In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on\
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter\
was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she\
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and\
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.\
The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what\
he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though\
she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own\
words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the\
will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living\
was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was\
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the\
other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did\
not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the\
particulars immediately following of Wickham\'92s resigning all pretensions\
to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three\
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down\
the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be\
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with\
little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read\
on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had\
believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to\
render Mr. Darcy\'92s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a\
turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.\
\
The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at\
Mr. Wickham\'92s charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could\
bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his\
entrance into the ----shire Militia, in which he had engaged at the\
persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town,\
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life\
nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told himself. As\
to his real character, had information been in her power, she had\
never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had\
established him at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried\
to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of\
integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of\
Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those\
casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy\
had described as the idleness and vice of many years\'92 continuance. But\
no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before\
her, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more\
substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and\
the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After\
pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to\
read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss\
Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel\
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was\
referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam\
himself--from whom she had previously received the information of his\
near concern in all his cousin\'92s affairs, and whose character she had no\
reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to\
him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and\
at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never\
have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his\
cousin\'92s corroboration.\
\
She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation\
between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips\'92s.\
Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_\
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and\
wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting\
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions\
with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear\
of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that\
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball\
the very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfield\
family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but\
herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed;\
that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy\'92s\
character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would\
always prevent his exposing the son.\
\
How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned!\
His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and\
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer\
the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.\
His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he had\
either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying\
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most\
incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter\
and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not\
but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago\
asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as\
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their\
acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much\
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything\
that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him\
of irreligious or immoral habits; that among his own connections he was\
esteemed and valued--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a\
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his\
sister as to prove him capable of _some_ amiable feeling; that had his\
actions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of\
everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and\
that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man\
as Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible.\
\
She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham\
could she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced,\
absurd.\
\
\'93How despicably I have acted!\'94 she cried; \'93I, who have prided myself\
on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have\
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified\
my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! How humiliating is this\
discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could\
not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been my\
folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect\
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted\
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were\
concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself.\'94\
\
From herself to Jane--from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line\
which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy\'92s explanation\
_there_ had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely\
different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that\
credit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged to\
give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of her\
sister\'92s attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte\'92s\
opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his\
description of Jane. She felt that Jane\'92s feelings, though fervent, were\
little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air\
and manner not often united with great sensibility.\
\
When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were\
mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her sense\
of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly\
for denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded as\
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first\
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind\
than on hers.\
\
The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed,\
but it could not console her for the contempt which had thus been\
self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered\
that Jane\'92s disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearest\
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt\
by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she\
had ever known before.\
\
After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every\
variety of thought--re-considering events, determining probabilities,\
and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and\
so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made\
her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish\
of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such\
reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.\
\
She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each\
called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take\
leave--but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least\
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her\
till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern\
in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no\
longer an object; she could think only of her letter.\
\
\
\
Chapter 37\
\
\
The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins having\
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was\
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very\
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the\
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then\
hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return\
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,\
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of\
having them all to dine with her.\
\
Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had\
she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as\
her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her\
ladyship\'92s indignation would have been. \'93What would she have said? how\
would she have behaved?\'94 were questions with which she amused herself.\
\
Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. \'93I assure\
you, I feel it exceedingly,\'94 said Lady Catherine; \'93I believe no one\
feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly\
attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to\
me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The\
dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy\
seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. His\
attachment to Rosings certainly increases.\'94\
\
Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which\
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.\
\
Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of\
spirits, and immediately accounting for it by herself, by supposing that\
she did not like to go home again so soon, she added:\
\
\'93But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that\
you may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your\
company, I am sure.\'94\
\
\'93I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,\'94 replied\
Elizabeth, \'93but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town\
next Saturday.\'94\
\
\'93Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected\
you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There\
can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly\
spare you for another fortnight.\'94\
\
\'93But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters\
are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay\
another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as\
far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as\
Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room\
for one of you--and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I\
should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.\'94\
\
\'93You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our\
original plan.\'94\
\
Lady Catherine seemed resigned. \'93Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant\
with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea\
of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.\
You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in\
the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly\
guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my\
niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her\
having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of\
Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with\
propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those\
things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I\
am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be\
discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.\'94\
\
\'93My uncle is to send a servant for us.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you\
have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you change horses?\
Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be\
attended to.\'94\
\
Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey,\
and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary,\
which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so\
occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be\
reserved for solitary hours; whenever she was alone, she gave way to it\
as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary\
walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant\
recollections.\
\
Mr. Darcy\'92s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She\
studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at\
times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,\
she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustly\
she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against\
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.\
His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but she\
could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal,\
or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past\
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in\
the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.\
They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at\
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his\
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right\
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently\
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine\
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother\'92s indulgence,\
what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,\
irritable, and completely under Lydia\'92s guidance, had been always\
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would\
scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While\
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while\
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there\
forever.\
\
Anxiety on Jane\'92s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy\'92s\
explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,\
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved\
to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any\
could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How\
grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every\
respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had\
been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!\
\
When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham\'92s\
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had\
seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it\
almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.\
\
Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of\
her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent\
there; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of\
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,\
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right\
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the\
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.\
\
When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them\
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;\
and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her\
hand to both.\
\
\
\
Chapter 38\
\
\
On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few\
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of\
paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.\
\
\'93I know not, Miss Elizabeth,\'94 said he, \'93whether Mrs. Collins has yet\
expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very\
certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for\
it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We\
know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain\
manner of living, our small rooms and few domestics, and the little we\
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like\
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,\
and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spending\
your time unpleasantly.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She\
had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with\
Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make _her_\
feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling\
solemnity replied:\
\
\'93It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not\
disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately\
having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and,\
from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the\
humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford\
visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to\
Lady Catherine\'92s family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage\
and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You\
see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge\
that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should\
not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are\
sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.\'94\
\
Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was\
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility\
and truth in a few short sentences.\
\
\'93You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into\
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you will\
be able to do so. Lady Catherine\'92s great attentions to Mrs. Collins you\
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear\
that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be\
as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,\
that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in\
marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of\
thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of\
character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each\
other.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was\
the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed\
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to\
have the recital of them interrupted by the lady from whom they sprang.\
Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she\
had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that\
her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her\
home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their\
dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.\
\
At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels\
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate\
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by\
Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her\
with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks\
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his\
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her\
in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,\
when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had\
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings.\
\
\'93But,\'94 he added, \'93you will of course wish to have your humble respects\
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you\
while you have been here.\'94\
\
Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and\
the carriage drove off.\
\
\'93Good gracious!\'94 cried Maria, after a few minutes\'92 silence, \'93it seems\
but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have\
happened!\'94\
\
\'93A great many indeed,\'94 said her companion with a sigh.\
\
\'93We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!\
How much I shall have to tell!\'94\
\
Elizabeth added privately, \'93And how much I shall have to conceal!\'94\
\
Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and\
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner\'92s\
house, where they were to remain a few days.\
\
Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her\
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her\
aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at\
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.\
\
It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for\
Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy\'92s proposals. To know\
that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish\
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own\
vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation\
to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision\
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate;\
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried\
into repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister\
further.\
\
\
\
Chapter 39\
\
\
It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out\
together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;\
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet\'92s carriage\
was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman\'92s\
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs.\
These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed\
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and\
dressing a salad and cucumber.\
\
After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set\
out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,\
\'93Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?\'94\
\
\'93And we mean to treat you all,\'94 added Lydia, \'93but you must lend us the\
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.\'94 Then, showing\
her purchases--\'93Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think\
it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall\
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any\
better.\'94\
\
And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect\
unconcern, \'93Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and\
when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I\
think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what\
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they\
are going in a fortnight.\'94\
\
\'93Are they indeed!\'94 cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.\
\
\'93They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to\
take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme;\
and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to\
go too of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall\
have!\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 thought Elizabeth, \'93_that_ would be a delightful scheme indeed,\
and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole\
campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor\
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!\'94\
\
\'93Now I have got some news for you,\'94 said Lydia, as they sat down at\
table. \'93What do you think? It is excellent news--capital news--and about\
a certain person we all like!\'94\
\
Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need\
not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:\
\
\'93Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the\
waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse\
things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad\
he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for\
my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not?\
There is no danger of Wickham\'92s marrying Mary King. There\'92s for you! She\
is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe.\'94\
\
\'93And Mary King is safe!\'94 added Elizabeth; \'93safe from a connection\
imprudent as to fortune.\'94\
\
\'93She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.\'94\
\
\'93But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,\'94 said Jane.\
\
\'93I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared\
three straws about her--who could about such a nasty little freckled\
thing?\'94\
\
Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such\
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_\
was little other than her own breast had harboured and fancied liberal!\
\
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was\
ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their\
boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty\'92s and\
Lydia\'92s purchases, were seated in it.\
\
\'93How nicely we are all crammed in,\'94 cried Lydia. \'93I am glad I bought my\
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox! Well, now\
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way\
home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all\
since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any\
flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband\
before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.\
She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not\
being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to\
get husbands, you can\'92t think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.\
Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!\
how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would\
chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece\
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster\'92s. Kitty and me were to spend\
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the\
evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so\
she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen\
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We\
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman\'92s clothes on purpose to pass for a\
lady, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.\
Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow\
one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,\
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they\
did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.\
Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect\
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.\'94\
\
With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did\
Lydia, assisted by Kitty\'92s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her\
companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she\
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham\'92s name.\
\
Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane\
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet\
say voluntarily to Elizabeth:\
\
\'93I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.\'94\
\
Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases\
came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects that\
occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare and\
poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one\
hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat\
some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger\
Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person\'92s,\
was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who\
would hear her.\
\
\'93Oh! Mary,\'94 said she, \'93I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!\
As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and pretended there\
was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty\
had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved\
very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold\
luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated\
you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never\
should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then\
we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that\
anybody might have heard us ten miles off!\'94\
\
To this Mary very gravely replied, \'93Far be it from me, my dear sister,\
to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the\
generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for\
_me_--I should infinitely prefer a book.\'94\
\
But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to\
anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.\
\
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk\
to Meryton, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily\
opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could\
not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.\
There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr.\
Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The\
comfort to _her_ of the regiment\'92s approaching removal was indeed beyond\
expression. In a fortnight they were to go--and once gone, she hoped\
there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.\
\
She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brighton\
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under\
frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her\
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were\
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often\
disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.\
\
\
\
Chapter 40\
\
\
Elizabeth\'92s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could\
no longer be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress every\
particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be\
surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene\
between Mr. Darcy and herself.\
\
Miss Bennet\'92s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly\
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly\
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was\
sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so\
little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the\
unhappiness which her sister\'92s refusal must have given him.\
\
\'93His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,\'94 said she, \'93and certainly\
ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his\
disappointment!\'94\
\
\'93Indeed,\'94 replied Elizabeth, \'93I am heartily sorry for him; but he has\
other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.\
You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?\'94\
\
\'93Blame you! Oh, no.\'94\
\
\'93But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?\'94\
\
\'93No--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.\'94\
\
\'93But you _will_ know it, when I tell you what happened the very next\
day.\'94\
\
She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far\
as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane!\
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that\
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here\
collected in one individual. Nor was Darcy\'92s vindication, though\
grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery.\
Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and\
seek to clear the one without involving the other.\
\
\'93This will not do,\'94 said Elizabeth; \'93you never will be able to make both\
of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied\
with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just\
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting\
about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Darcy\'92s;\
but you shall do as you choose.\'94\
\
It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.\
\
\'93I do not know when I have been more shocked,\'94 said she. \'93Wickham so\
very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only\
consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the\
knowledge of your ill opinion, too! and having to relate such a thing\
of his sister! It is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel it\
so.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so\
full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am\
growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion\
makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will\
be as light as a feather.\'94\
\
\'93Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his\
countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner!\'94\
\
\'93There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those\
two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the\
appearance of it.\'94\
\
\'93I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you\
used to do.\'94\
\
\'93And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike\
to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one\'92s genius, such an\
opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually\
abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot always be laughing\
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.\'94\
\
\'93Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat\
the matter as you do now.\'94\
\
\'93Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say unhappy. And\
with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane to comfort me and say\
that I had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I knew I\
had! Oh! how I wanted you!\'94\
\
\'93How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions\
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly\
undeserved.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most\
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There\
is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I\
ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintances in general understand\
Wickham\'92s character.\'94\
\
Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, \'93Surely there can be no\
occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your opinion?\'94\
\
\'93That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorised me\
to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular\
relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to\
myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his\
conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy\
is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in\
Meryton to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal\
to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to\
anyone here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out,\
and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At\
present I will say nothing about it.\'94\
\
\'93You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for\
ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to\
re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.\'94\
\
The tumult of Elizabeth\'92s mind was allayed by this conversation. She had\
got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight,\
and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish\
to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind,\
of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other\
half of Mr. Darcy\'92s letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she\
had been valued by her friend. Here was knowledge in which no one\
could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect\
understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off\
this last encumbrance of mystery. \'93And then,\'94 said she, \'93if that very\
improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to\
tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. The\
liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!\'94\
\
She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real\
state of her sister\'92s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a\
very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself\
in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment,\
and, from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than most first\
attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance,\
and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her\
attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the\
indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own\
health and their tranquillity.\
\
\'93Well, Lizzy,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet one day, \'93what is your opinion _now_ of\
this sad business of Jane\'92s? For my part, I am determined never to speak\
of it again to anybody. I told my sister Phillips so the other day. But\
I cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is\
a very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there\'92s the least\
chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of\
his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of\
everybody, too, who is likely to know.\'94\
\
\'93I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more.\'94\
\
\'93Oh well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come. Though I\
shall always say he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was her, I\
would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Jane will\
die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done.\'94\
\
But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation,\
she made no answer.\
\
\'93Well, Lizzy,\'94 continued her mother, soon afterwards, \'93and so the\
Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope\
it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an\
excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her\
mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_\
housekeeping, I dare say.\'94\
\
\'93No, nothing at all.\'94\
\
\'93A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes, _they_ will\
take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed\
for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often\
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it as\
quite their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.\'94\
\
\'93It was a subject which they could not mention before me.\'94\
\
\'93No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt they\
often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an\
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I should be\
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 41\
\
\
The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was\
the last of the regiment\'92s stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies\
in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost\
universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,\
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very\
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and\
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such\
hard-heartedness in any of the family.\
\
\'93Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?\'94 would they\
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. \'93How can you be smiling so,\
Lizzy?\'94\
\
Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what\
she had herself endured on a similar occasion, five-and-twenty years\
ago.\
\
\'93I am sure,\'94 said she, \'93I cried for two days together when Colonel\
Miller\'92s regiment went away. I thought I should have broken my heart.\'94\
\
\'93I am sure I shall break _mine_,\'94 said Lydia.\
\
\'93If one could but go to Brighton!\'94 observed Mrs. Bennet.\
\
\'93Oh, yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so\
disagreeable.\'94\
\
\'93A little sea-bathing would set me up forever.\'94\
\
\'93And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,\'94\
 added Kitty.\
\
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through\
Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense\
of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy\'92s\
objections; and never had she been so much disposed to pardon his\
interference in the views of his friend.\
\
But the gloom of Lydia\'92s prospect was shortly cleared away; for she\
received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of\
the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a\
very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good humour\
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of\
their _three_ months\'92 acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.\
\
The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster,\
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely\
to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister\'92s feelings, Lydia\
flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone\'92s\
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;\
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repined at her fate\
in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.\
\
\'93I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,\'94\
 said she, \'93Though I am _not_ her particular friend. I have just as much\
right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.\'94\
\
In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make\
her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from\
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she\
considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense\
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it\
known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her\
go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia\'92s general\
behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of\
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more\
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must\
be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said:\
\
\'93Lydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some public\
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so\
little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present\
circumstances.\'94\
\
\'93If you were aware,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93of the very great disadvantage to\
us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia\'92s unguarded and\
imprudent manner--nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you\
would judge differently in the affair.\'94\
\
\'93Already arisen?\'94 repeated Mr. Bennet. \'93What, has she frightened away\
some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such\
squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity\
are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of pitiful fellows who\
have been kept aloof by Lydia\'92s folly.\'94\
\
\'93Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not\
of particular, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our\
importance, our respectability in the world must be affected by the\
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark\
Lydia\'92s character. Excuse me, for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear\
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and\
of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of\
her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character\
will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt\
that ever made herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in the\
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond\
youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness\
of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal\
contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger\
Kitty also is comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,\
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can you\
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever\
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the\
disgrace?\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject, and\
affectionately taking her hand said in reply:\
\
\'93Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known\
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less\
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly\
sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to\
Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will\
keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an\
object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance\
even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find\
women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being\
there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow\
many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest\
of her life.\'94\
\
With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion\
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not\
in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on\
them. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret\
over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her\
disposition.\
\
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her\
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their\
united volubility. In Lydia\'92s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised\
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye\
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.\
She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them\
at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp--its tents\
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young\
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she\
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six\
officers at once.\
\
Had she known her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such\
realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could have\
been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same.\
Lydia\'92s going to Brighton was all that consoled her for her melancholy\
conviction of her husband\'92s never intending to go there himself.\
\
But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures\
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia\'92s leaving\
home.\
\
Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been\
frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty\
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even\
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted\
her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present\
behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure,\
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which\
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after\
what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in\
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous\
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the\
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever\
cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,\
and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.\
\
On the very last day of the regiment\'92s remaining at Meryton, he dined,\
with other of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth\
disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some\
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she\
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam\'92s and Mr. Darcy\'92s having both spent three\
weeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former.\
\
He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment\'92s\
recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen\
him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,\
asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour.\
With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added:\
\
\'93How long did you say he was at Rosings?\'94\
\
\'93Nearly three weeks.\'94\
\
\'93And you saw him frequently?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, almost every day.\'94\
\
\'93His manners are very different from his cousin\'92s.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy improves upon acquaintance.\'94\
\
\'93Indeed!\'94 cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her. \'93And\
pray, may I ask?--\'94 But checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, \'93Is\
it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility\
to his ordinary style?--for I dare not hope,\'94 he continued in a lower\
and more serious tone, \'93that he is improved in essentials.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, no!\'94 said Elizabeth. \'93In essentials, I believe, he is very much\
what he ever was.\'94\
\
While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to\
rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a\
something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive\
and anxious attention, while she added:\
\
\'93When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that\
his mind or his manners were in a state of improvement, but that, from\
knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.\'94\
\
Wickham\'92s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated\
look; for a few minutes he was silent, till, shaking off his\
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of\
accents:\
\
\'93You, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily\
comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume\
even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction,\
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must only\
deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only\
fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been\
alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good\
opinion and judgement he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always\
operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be\
imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I\
am certain he has very much at heart.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a\
slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on\
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge\
him. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his\
side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish\
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a\
mutual desire of never meeting again.\
\
When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,\
from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation\
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the\
only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs.\
Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,\
and impressive in her injunctions that she should not miss the\
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible--advice which\
there was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and in\
the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more\
gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.\
\
\
\
Chapter 42\
\
\
Had Elizabeth\'92s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could\
not have formed a very pleasing opinion of conjugal felicity or domestic\
comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance\
of good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a\
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in\
their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,\
esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views\
of domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of\
a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own\
imprudence had brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often\
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of\
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal\
enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as\
her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not\
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his\
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true\
philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.\
\
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her\
father\'92s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but\
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of\
herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to\
banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation\
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own\
children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so\
strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so\
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising\
from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used,\
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even\
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.\
\
When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham\'92s departure she found little\
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties\
abroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother and\
sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around\
them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty\
might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers\
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition\
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all\
her folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a\
watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what\
has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had been\
looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the\
satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to\
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity--to have\
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by\
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the\
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes\
was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation\
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother\
and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the\
scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.\
\
\'93But it is fortunate,\'94 thought she, \'93that I have something to wish for.\
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.\
But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my\
sister\'92s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of\
pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight can\
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by\
the defence of some little peculiar vexation.\'94\
\
When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely\
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and\
always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that\
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers\
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as\
made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which\
she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a\
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going off to\
the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still\
less to be learnt--for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were\
much too full of lines under the words to be made public.\
\
After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good\
humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything wore\
a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came\
back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet\
was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of\
June, Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without\
tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by\
the following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to\
mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious\
arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quartered in\
Meryton.\
\
The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast\
approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter\
arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and\
curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from\
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again\
within a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go so\
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with\
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up\
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the\
present plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire. In that\
county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three\
weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The\
town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where\
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of\
her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,\
Dovedale, or the Peak.\
\
Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing\
the Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But it\
was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;\
and all was soon right again.\
\
With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected. It was\
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its\
owner. \'93But surely,\'94 said she, \'93I may enter his county with impunity,\
and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me.\'94\
\
The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away\
before her uncle and aunt\'92s arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr.\
and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at\
Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two\
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their\
cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and\
sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every\
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.\
\
The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the\
next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.\
One enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness of companions;\
a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear\
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection\
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were\
disappointments abroad.\
\
It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,\
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither\
lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc. are\
sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present\
concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner\'92s\
former residence, and where she had lately learned some acquaintance\
still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the\
principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton,\
Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was not\
in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In\
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed\
an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his\
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.\
\
\'93My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard\
so much?\'94 said her aunt; \'93a place, too, with which so many of your\
acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you\
know.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at\
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She\
must own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after going over so\
many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. \'93If it were merely a fine house\
richly furnished,\'94 said she, \'93I should not care about it myself; but\
the grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the\
country.\'94\
\
Elizabeth said no more--but her mind could not acquiesce. The\
possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly\
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and\
thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run such\
a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved\
that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to the\
absence of the family were unfavourably answered.\
\
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid\
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name of its\
proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for\
the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question--and her\
alarms now being removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of\
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the\
next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and\
with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike\
to the scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.\
\
\
\
Chapter 43\
\
\
Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of\
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned\
in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.\
\
The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They\
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through\
a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.\
\
Elizabeth\'92s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired\
every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for\
half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable\
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by\
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which\
the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone\
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of\
high woody hills; and in front, a stream of some natural importance was\
swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks\
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She\
had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural\
beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were\
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that\
to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!\
\
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,\
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of\
meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been\
mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the\
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to\
wonder at her being where she was.\
\
The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly woman, much less\
fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They\
followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportioned\
room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went\
to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, which\
they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance,\
was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and\
she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its\
banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it,\
with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking\
different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be\
seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to\
the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of\
his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of\
splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.\
\
\'93And of this place,\'94 thought she, \'93I might have been mistress! With\
these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of\
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and\
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,\'94--recollecting\
herself--\'93that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to\
me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.\'94\
\
This was a lucky recollection--it saved her from something very like\
regret.\
\
She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really\
absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question\
was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs.\
Reynolds replied that he was, adding, \'93But we expect him to-morrow, with\
a large party of friends.\'94 How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own\
journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!\
\
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the\
likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures,\
over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.\
The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was a picture of a young\
gentleman, the son of her late master\'92s steward, who had been brought\
up by him at his own expense. \'93He is now gone into the army,\'94 she added;\
\'93but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.\'94\
\
Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not\
return it.\
\
\'93And that,\'94 said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,\
\'93is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the\
other--about eight years ago.\'94\
\
\'93I have heard much of your master\'92s fine person,\'94 said Mrs. Gardiner,\
looking at the picture; \'93it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell\
us whether it is like or not.\'94\
\
Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this\
intimation of her knowing her master.\
\
\'93Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?\'94\
\
Elizabeth coloured, and said: \'93A little.\'94\
\
\'93And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma\'92am?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, very handsome.\'94\
\
\'93I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you\
will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late\
master\'92s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to\
be then. He was very fond of them.\'94\
\
This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham\'92s being among them.\
\
Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn\
when she was only eight years old.\
\
\'93And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?\'94 said Mrs. Gardiner.\
\
\'93Oh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so\
accomplished!--She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is\
a new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master; she\
comes here to-morrow with him.\'94\
\
Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her\
communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either\
by pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her\
master and his sister.\
\
\'93Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?\'94\
\
\'93Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half his\
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.\'94\
\
\'93Except,\'94 thought Elizabeth, \'93when she goes to Ramsgate.\'94\
\
\'93If your master would marry, you might see more of him.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know who is\
good enough for him.\'94\
\
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, \'93It is\
very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.\'94\
\
\'93I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,\'94\
 replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she\
listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, \'93I have\
never known a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever\
since he was four years old.\'94\
\
This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her\
ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion.\
Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was\
grateful to her uncle for saying:\
\
\'93There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in\
having such a master.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could\
not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are\
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and\
he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the\
world.\'94\
\
Elizabeth almost stared at her. \'93Can this be Mr. Darcy?\'94 thought she.\
\
\'93His father was an excellent man,\'94 said Mrs. Gardiner.\
\
\'93Yes, ma\'92am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--just\
as affable to the poor.\'94\
\
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs.\
Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects\
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the\
furniture, in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family\
prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her\
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his\
many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.\
\
\'93He is the best landlord, and the best master,\'94 said she, \'93that ever\
lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but\
themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but will give\
him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw\
anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away\
like other young men.\'94\
\
\'93In what an amiable light does this place him!\'94 thought Elizabeth.\
\
\'93This fine account of him,\'94 whispered her aunt as they walked, \'93is not\
quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps we might be deceived.\'94\
\
\'93That is not very likely; our authority was too good.\'94\
\
On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty\
sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than\
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to\
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when\
last at Pemberley.\
\
\'93He is certainly a good brother,\'94 said Elizabeth, as she walked towards\
one of the windows.\
\
Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy\'92s delight, when she should enter\
the room. \'93And this is always the way with him,\'94 she added. \'93Whatever\
can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There\
is nothing he would not do for her.\'94\
\
The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were\
all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings;\
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already\
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss\
Darcy\'92s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and\
also more intelligible.\
\
In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have\
little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of\
the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested\
her--and she beheld a striking resemblance to Mr. Darcy, with such a\
smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he\
looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest\
contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery.\
Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father\'92s\
lifetime.\
\
There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth\'92s mind, a more gentle\
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of\
their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds\
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise\
of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she\
considered how many people\'92s happiness were in his guardianship!--how\
much of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow!--how much of\
good or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought\
forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she\
stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his\
eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of\
gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and\
softened its impropriety of expression.\
\
When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,\
they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were\
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.\
\
As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back\
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former\
was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself\
suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.\
\
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his\
appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes\
instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest\
blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from\
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,\
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least\
of perfect civility.\
\
She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,\
received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be\
overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture\
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two\
that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener\'92s expression of surprise, on\
beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little\
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,\
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer\
she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the\
alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that\
he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the\
impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few\
minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in\
her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent\
had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as\
to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed in\
Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the\
distraction of his thoughts.\
\
At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few\
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took\
leave.\
\
The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but\
Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings,\
followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her\
coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the\
world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light\
might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely\
thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did he\
thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes\
sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination;\
for it was plain that he was that moment arrived--that moment alighted\
from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again over\
the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly\
altered--what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was\
amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family!\
Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never\
had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What\
a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put\
his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account\
for it.\
\
They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and\
every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer\
reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time\
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered\
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and\
seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she\
distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that\
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then\
was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind--in\
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,\
she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he\
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice which was\
not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in\
seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with\
composure.\
\
At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind\
aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.\
\
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,\
ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of\
the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the\
valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading\
many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish\
of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.\
With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round.\
It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which\
brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods,\
to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed\
it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene;\
it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the\
valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream,\
and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it.\
Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the\
bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,\
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only\
of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was,\
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house\
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their\
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the\
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the\
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the\
man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this\
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth\'92s astonishment\
was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy\
approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here\
less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before\
they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared\
for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with\
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,\
she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea\
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the\
turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw\
that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his\
politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place;\
but she had not got beyond the words \'93delightful,\'94 and \'93charming,\'94 when\
some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of\
Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed,\
and she said no more.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked\
her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.\
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared;\
and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the\
acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had\
revolted in his offer to herself. \'93What will be his surprise,\'94 thought\
she, \'93when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of\
fashion.\'94\
\
The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their\
relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore\
it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he\
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by the\
connection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, and\
so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into\
conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,\
could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had\
some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most\
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every\
expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,\
his taste, or his good manners.\
\
The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcy\
invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he\
chose while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time\
to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of\
the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was\
walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder.\
Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment\
must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and\
continually was she repeating, \'93Why is he so altered? From what can\
it proceed? It cannot be for _me_--it cannot be for _my_ sake that his\
manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a\
change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me.\'94\
\
After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two\
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to\
the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious\
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated\
in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found\
Elizabeth\'92s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred\
her husband\'92s. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on\
together. After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She wished him\
to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the\
place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been\
very unexpected--\'93for your housekeeper,\'94 she added, \'93informed us that\
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, before we\
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected\
in the country.\'94 He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that\
business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours\
before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. \'93They\
will join me early to-morrow,\'94 he continued, \'93and among them are some\
who will claim an acquaintance with you--Mr. Bingley and his sisters.\'94\
\
Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly\
driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley\'92s name had been the last\
mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, _his_\
mind was not very differently engaged.\
\
\'93There is also one other person in the party,\'94 he continued after a\
pause, \'93who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow\
me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance\
during your stay at Lambton?\'94\
\
The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great\
for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt\
that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her\
must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was\
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made\
him think really ill of her.\
\
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth\
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and\
pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of\
the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had\
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a\
mile behind.\
\
He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not\
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might\
have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but\
there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected\
that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale\
with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her\
patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete was\
over. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner\'92s coming up they were all pressed to go\
into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and\
they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the\
ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him\
walking slowly towards the house.\
\
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them\
pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.\
\'93He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming,\'94 said her uncle.\
\
\'93There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,\'94 replied her\
aunt, \'93but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now\
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, I\
have seen nothing of it.\'94\
\
\'93I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more\
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such\
attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.\'94\
\
\'93To be sure, Lizzy,\'94 said her aunt, \'93he is not so handsome as Wickham;\
or, rather, he has not Wickham\'92s countenance, for his features\
are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he was so\
disagreeable?\'94\
\
Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had liked\
him better when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had never\
seen him so pleasant as this morning.\
\
\'93But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,\'94 replied\
her uncle. \'93Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him\
at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off\
his grounds.\'94\
\
Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but\
said nothing.\
\
\'93From what we have seen of him,\'94 continued Mrs. Gardiner, \'93I really\
should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by\
anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look.\
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he\
speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would\
not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the\
good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character!\
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal\
master, I suppose, and _that_ in the eye of a servant comprehends every\
virtue.\'94\
\
Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of\
his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in\
as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from\
his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different\
construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor\
Wickham\'92s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In\
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary\
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming\
her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now\
approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to\
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out\
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to think of\
anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning\'92s walk they\
had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former\
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of a\
intercourse renewed after many years\'92 discontinuance.\
\
The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth\
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing\
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy\'92s civility, and, above\
all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.\
\
\
\
Chapter 44\
\
\
Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit\
her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequently\
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.\
But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their\
arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They had been walking about the\
place with some of their new friends, and were just returning to the inn\
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a\
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in\
a curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing\
the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her\
surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which she\
expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment\
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many\
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on\
the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt that\
there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a\
quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these\
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of\
Elizabeth\'92s feelings was at every moment increasing. She was quite\
amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet,\
she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much\
in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally\
suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.\
\
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked\
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of\
inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.\
\
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction\
took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new\
acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her\
being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;\
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was\
only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from\
her beyond a monosyllable.\
\
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though\
little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance\
womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother; but there\
was sense and good humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly\
unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as\
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much\
relieved by discerning such different feelings.\
\
They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that Bingley\
was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her\
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley\'92s quick\
step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All\
Elizabeth\'92s anger against him had been long done away; but had she still\
felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected\
cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He\
inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked\
and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.\
\
To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage\
than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before\
them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just\
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed their observation towards\
each with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from\
those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew\
what it was to love. Of the lady\'92s sensations they remained a little\
in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was\
evident enough.\
\
Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the\
feelings of each of her visitors; she wanted to compose her own, and\
to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she\
feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she\
endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingley\
was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.\
\
In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and, oh!\
how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in\
a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on\
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion\
that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But,\
though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his\
behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No look\
appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred\
between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point\
she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred\
ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a\
recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying\
more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed\
to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone\
which had something of real regret, that it \'93was a very long time since\
he had had the pleasure of seeing her;\'94 and, before she could reply,\
he added, \'93It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of\
November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards\
took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether\
_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question,\
nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which\
gave them meaning.\
\
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself;\
but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of general\
complaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so removed\
from _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that\
the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed however\
temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When\
she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion\
of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a\
disgrace--when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the\
very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last\
lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage--the difference, the change was\
so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly\
restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company\
of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations\
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from\
self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance\
could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the\
acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw\
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and\
Rosings.\
\
Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they arose\
to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing\
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner\
at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a\
diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,\
readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing\
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its\
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming however,\
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than\
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of\
society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for\
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.\
\
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth\
again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to\
make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all\
this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased, and on\
this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their\
visitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with some\
satisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been\
little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her\
uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their\
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.\
\
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner\'92s curiosity; it was\
not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was\
much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;\
it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to\
interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.\
\
Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far\
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could\
not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character\
from their own feelings and his servant\'92s report, without any reference\
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known\
would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest,\
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible\
that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four\
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be\
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of\
their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had\
nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not,\
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town\
where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he\
was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.\
\
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held\
there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the\
son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known\
fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind\
him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.\
\
As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than\
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not\
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion;\
and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. She\
certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she\
had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him,\
that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his\
valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some\
time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now heightened\
into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in\
his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,\
which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem,\
there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked.\
It was gratitude; gratitude, not merely for having once loved her,\
but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and\
acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations\
accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid\
her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most\
eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display\
of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only\
were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent\
on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much\
pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude--for to love, ardent\
love, it must be attributed; and as such its impression on her was of a\
sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be\
exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him,\
she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how\
far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would\
be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her\
fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on her the renewal of\
his addresses.\
\
It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that\
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy\'92s in coming to see them on the\
very day of her arrival at Pemberley, for she had reached it only to a\
late breakfast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled,\
by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that\
it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following\
morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when\
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.\
\
Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been\
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting\
some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.\
\
\
\
Chapter 45\
\
\
Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley\'92s dislike of her had\
originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how unwelcome her\
appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with how\
much civility on that lady\'92s side the acquaintance would now be renewed.\
\
On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,\
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows\
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody\
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts\
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.\
\
In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there\
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in\
London. Georgiana\'92s reception of them was very civil, but attended with\
all the embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear\
of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior\
the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece,\
however, did her justice, and pitied her.\
\
By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and,\
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,\
succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a\
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind\
of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the\
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from\
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she\
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a\
short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.\
\
Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,\
and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without\
calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her\
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an\
inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity\
of saying much. Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every\
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, she\
feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether\
she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After\
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Miss\
Bingley\'92s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold\
inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal\
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.\
\
The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the\
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the\
finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many\
a significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been\
given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole\
party--for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the\
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches soon collected\
them round the table.\
\
While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether\
she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the\
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but\
a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to\
regret that he came.\
\
He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other\
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left him\
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to\
Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely\
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more\
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she\
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,\
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour\
when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive\
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley\'92s, in spite of the\
smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its\
objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions\
to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother\'92s\
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that he\
was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded\
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss\
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the\
first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility:\
\
\'93Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire Militia removed from Meryton?\
They must be a great loss to _your_ family.\'94\
\
In Darcy\'92s presence she dared not mention Wickham\'92s name; but Elizabeth\
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the\
various recollections connected with him gave her a moment\'92s distress;\
but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she\
presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. While\
she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened\
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with\
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what\
pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would\
have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose\
Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed\
her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in\
Darcy\'92s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies\
and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected\
with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy\'92s\
meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy\
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley\'92s connections\
her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very\
wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming\
hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and without\
meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss\
Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern\
for the welfare of his friend.\
\
Elizabeth\'92s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and\
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to\
Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able\
to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely\
recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which\
had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have\
fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.\
\
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above\
mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage Miss\
Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth\'92s person,\
behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother\'92s\
recommendation was enough to ensure her favour; his judgement could not\
err. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana\
without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When\
Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to\
him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.\
\
\'93How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,\'94 she\
cried; \'93I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since\
the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing\
that we should not have known her again.\'94\
\
However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented\
himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other alteration than\
her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of travelling in the\
summer.\
\
\'93For my own part,\'94 she rejoined, \'93I must confess that I never could\
see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no\
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose\
wants character--there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are\
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes,\
which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anything\
extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do\
not like at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency\
without fashion, which is intolerable.\'94\
\
Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not\
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always\
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the\
success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however, and, from a\
determination of making him speak, she continued:\
\
\'93I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all\
were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect\
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, \'91_She_\
a beauty!--I should as soon call her mother a wit.\'92 But afterwards she\
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at\
one time.\'94\
\
\'93Yes,\'94 replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, \'93but _that_\
was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since I have\
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.\'94\
\
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of\
having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their\
visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them\
both. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,\
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked\
of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit--of everything but\
himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of\
him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece\'92s\
beginning the subject.\
\
\
\
Chapter 46\
\
\
Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from\
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been\
renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but\
on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the\
receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that\
it had been missent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as\
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.\
\
They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and\
her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by\
themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had been\
written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their\
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;\
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident\
agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:\
\
\'93Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a\
most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be\
assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia.\
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,\
from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland\
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our\
surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am\
very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing\
to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.\
Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step\
(and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is\
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.\
Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How\
thankful am I that we never let them know what has been said against\
him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about\
twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at\
eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have\
passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect\
him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of\
their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor\
mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly\
know what I have written.\'94\
\
Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing\
what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the\
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it\
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.\
\
\'93By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I\
wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my\
head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest\
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you,\
and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham\
and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has\
taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone\
to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the\
day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia\'92s short\
letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna\
Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W.\
never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was\
repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.\
intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham,\
but no further; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackney\
coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that\
is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road.\
I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that\
side London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing\
them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but\
without any success--no such people had been seen to pass through. With\
the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions\
to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved\
for him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Our\
distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the\
worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might make\
it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue\
their first plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design against a\
young woman of Lydia\'92s connections, which is not likely, can I suppose\
her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that\
Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook his\
head when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man to\
be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she\
exert herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. And\
as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has\
anger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of\
confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you\
have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the\
first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not\
so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I\
take up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; but\
circumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to\
come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well,\
that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still something\
more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel\
Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I am sure\
I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any\
measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to\
be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence, my\
uncle\'92s advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will\
immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! where, where is my uncle?\'94 cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat\
as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing\
a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it was\
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuous\
manner made him start, and before he could recover himself to speak,\
she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia\'92s situation,\
hastily exclaimed, \'93I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find\
Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have not\
an instant to lose.\'94\
\
\'93Good God! what is the matter?\'94 cried he, with more feeling than\
politeness; then recollecting himself, \'93I will not detain you a minute;\
but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are\
not well enough; you cannot go yourself.\'94\
\
Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt how\
little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back\
the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless\
an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and\
mistress home instantly.\
\
On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself, and\
looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her,\
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,\
\'93Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you\
present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.\'94\
\
\'93No, I thank you,\'94 she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. \'93There\
is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by\
some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.\'94\
\
She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could\
not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say\
something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate\
silence. At length she spoke again. \'93I have just had a letter from Jane,\
with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My younger\
sister has left all her friends--has eloped; has thrown herself into\
the power of--of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton.\
_You_ know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no\
connections, nothing that can tempt him to--she is lost for ever.\'94\
\
Darcy was fixed in astonishment. \'93When I consider,\'94 she added in a yet\
more agitated voice, \'93that I might have prevented it! I, who knew what\
he was. Had I but explained some part of it only--some part of what I\
learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not\
have happened. But it is all--all too late now.\'94\
\
\'93I am grieved indeed,\'94 cried Darcy; \'93grieved--shocked. But is it\
certain--absolutely certain?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced\
almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone to\
Scotland.\'94\
\
\'93And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?\'94\
\
\'93My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle\'92s\
immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But\
nothing can be done--I know very well that nothing can be done. How is\
such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have\
not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!\'94\
\
Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.\
\
\'93When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character--Oh! had I known what\
I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too\
much. Wretched, wretched mistake!\'94\
\
Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking\
up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air\
gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her\
power was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of family\
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither\
wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing\
consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It\
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own\
wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved\
him, as now, when all love must be vain.\
\
But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the\
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed\
up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,\
Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of\
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by\
the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke\
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, \'93I am afraid you have been\
long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my\
stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything\
could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to\
such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may\
seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I\
fear, prevent my sister\'92s having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley\
to-day.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say that\
urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as\
long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long.\'94\
\
He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for\
her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present\
reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only\
one serious, parting look, went away.\
\
As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they\
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as\
had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a\
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full\
of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those\
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would\
formerly have rejoiced in its termination.\
\
If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth\'92s\
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if\
otherwise--if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or\
unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on\
a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been\
exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given\
somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham,\
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the other\
less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him\
go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia\'92s infamy must\
produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched\
business. Never, since reading Jane\'92s second letter, had she entertained\
a hope of Wickham\'92s meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought,\
could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least\
of her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first\
letter remained in her mind, she was all surprise--all astonishment that\
Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry\
for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared\
incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachment\
as this she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not suppose\
Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intention\
of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue\
nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.\
\
She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that\
Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia\
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one\
officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions\
raised them in her opinion. Her affections had continually been\
fluctuating but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and\
mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she now\
feel it!\
\
She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to\
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a\
family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and\
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing\
could be done for Lydia, her uncle\'92s interference seemed of the utmost\
importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. Mr.\
and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant\'92s\
account that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them\
instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their\
summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript\
of the last with trembling energy.--Though Lydia had never been a\
favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply\
afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the\
first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner promised every\
assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked\
him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit,\
everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to\
be off as soon as possible. \'93But what is to be done about Pemberley?\'94\
 cried Mrs. Gardiner. \'93John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for\
us; was it so?\'94\
\
\'93Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.\
_That_ is all settled.\'94\
\
\'93What is all settled?\'94 repeated the other, as she ran into her room to\
prepare. \'93And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real\
truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!\'94\
\
But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in the\
hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure\
to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was\
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of\
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to\
be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their\
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.\
Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing\
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of\
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could\
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.\
\
\
\
Chapter 47\
\
\
\'93I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,\'94 said her uncle, as they\
drove from the town; \'93and really, upon serious consideration, I am much\
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the\
matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should\
form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or\
friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel\'92s family, that I\
am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends\
would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the\
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is\
not adequate to the risk!\'94\
\
\'93Do you really think so?\'94 cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.\
\
\'93Upon my word,\'94 said Mrs. Gardiner, \'93I begin to be of your uncle\'92s\
opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and\
interest, for him to be guilty of. I cannot think so very ill of\
Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believe\
him capable of it?\'94\
\
\'93Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other\
neglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I\
dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if that had been\
the case?\'94\
\
\'93In the first place,\'94 replied Mr. Gardiner, \'93there is no absolute proof\
that they are not gone to Scotland.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such\
a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the\
Barnet road.\'94\
\
\'93Well, then--supposing them to be in London. They may be there, though\
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose. It is\
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it\
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less\
expeditiously, married in London than in Scotland.\'94\
\
\'93But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their\
marriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most particular\
friend, you see by Jane\'92s account, was persuaded of his never intending\
to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He\
cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia--what attraction has she\
beyond youth, health, and good humour that could make him, for her sake,\
forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what\
restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a\
dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know\
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your\
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has\
no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father\'92s\
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever\
seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ would\
do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in\
such a matter.\'94\
\
\'93But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him\
as to consent to live with him on any terms other than marriage?\'94\
\
\'93It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed,\'94 replied Elizabeth, with\
tears in her eyes, \'93that a sister\'92s sense of decency and virtue in such\
a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.\
Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young; she has never\
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year,\
nay, for a twelvemonth--she has been given up to nothing but amusement\
and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle\
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.\
Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,\
flirtation, and officers have been in her head. She has been doing\
everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give\
greater--what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are\
naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of\
person and address that can captivate a woman.\'94\
\
\'93But you see that Jane,\'94 said her aunt, \'93does not think so very ill of\
Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt.\'94\
\
\'93Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be\
their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt,\
till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what\
Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every\
sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is\
as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.\'94\
\
\'93And do you really know all this?\'94 cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity\
as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.\
\
\'93I do indeed,\'94 replied Elizabeth, colouring. \'93I told you, the other day,\
of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you yourself, when last at\
Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved\
with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other\
circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to\
relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From\
what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,\
reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He\
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found\
her.\'94\
\
\'93But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you\
and Jane seem so well to understand?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw\
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was\
ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the ----shire\
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight\'92s time. As that was the\
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it\
necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could\
it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the\
neighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it was\
settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening\
her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could be\
in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a\
consequence as _this_ could ensue, you may easily believe, was far\
enough from my thoughts.\'94\
\
\'93When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I\
suppose, to believe them fond of each other?\'94\
\
\'93Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either\
side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware\
that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first\
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all\
were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for\
the first two months; but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular\
attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and\
wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,\
who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.\'94\
\
                          * * * * *\
\
It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added\
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by\
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during\
the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth\'92s thoughts it was never absent.\
Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find\
no interval of ease or forgetfulness.\
\
They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one night\
on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was a\
comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied\
by long expectations.\
\
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing\
on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and, when the\
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their\
faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of\
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.\
\
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss,\
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from her\
mother\'92s apartment, immediately met her.\
\
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the\
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been\
heard of the fugitives.\
\
\'93Not yet,\'94 replied Jane. \'93But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope\
everything will be well.\'94\
\
\'93Is my father in town?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.\'94\
\
\'93And have you heard from him often?\'94\
\
\'93We have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday to say\
that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I\
particularly begged him to do. He merely added that he should not write\
again till he had something of importance to mention.\'94\
\
\'93And my mother--how is she? How are you all?\'94\
\
\'93My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly\
shaken. She is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing you\
all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank\
Heaven, are quite well.\'94\
\
\'93But you--how are you?\'94 cried Elizabeth. \'93You look pale. How much you\
must have gone through!\'94\
\
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their\
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were\
engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach\
of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and\
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.\
\
When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth\
had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon\
found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of\
good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested had not yet\
deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that\
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,\
to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.\
\
Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes\'92\
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with\
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous\
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage;\
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the\
errors of her daughter must principally be owing.\
\
\'93If I had been able,\'94 said she, \'93to carry my point in going to Brighton,\
with all my family, _this_ would not have happened; but poor dear Lydia\
had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out\
of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their\
side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been\
well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the\
charge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child!\
And now here\'92s Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham,\
wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to become\
of us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his\
grave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we\
shall do.\'94\
\
They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after\
general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her\
that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr.\
Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.\
\
\'93Do not give way to useless alarm,\'94 added he; \'93though it is right to be\
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.\
It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more we\
may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,\
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as\
lost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make\
him come home with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult\
together as to what is to be done.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! my dear brother,\'94 replied Mrs. Bennet, \'93that is exactly what I\
could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,\
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them\
marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but\
tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,\
after they are married. And, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting.\
Tell him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my\
wits--and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me--such\
spasms in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that\
I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not to\
give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does\
not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I\
know you will contrive it all.\'94\
\
But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours\
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well\
in her hopes as her fear; and after talking with her in this manner till\
dinner was on the table, they all left her to vent all her feelings on\
the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.\
\
Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real\
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to\
oppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her\
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it\
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could\
most trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the\
subject.\
\
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been\
too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance\
before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The\
faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible\
in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger\
which she had herself incurred in this business, had given more of\
fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was\
mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance\
of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:\
\
\'93This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.\
But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of\
each other the balm of sisterly consolation.\'94\
\
Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,\
\'93Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful\
lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that one\
false step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less\
brittle than it is beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guarded in\
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.\'94\
\
Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed\
to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such\
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.\
\
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for\
half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of\
the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to\
satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel\
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss\
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued\
the subject, by saying, \'93But tell me all and everything about it which\
I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel\
Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement\
took place? They must have seen them together for ever.\'94\
\
\'93Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality,\
especially on Lydia\'92s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so\
grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He\
_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had\
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension\
first got abroad, it hastened his journey.\'94\
\
\'93And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of\
their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?\'94\
\
\'93Yes; but, when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing anything of\
their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not\
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying--and from _that_, I am\
inclined to hope, he might have been misunderstood before.\'94\
\
\'93And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a\
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?\'94\
\
\'93How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt\
a little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister\'92s happiness with him\
in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite\
right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how\
imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural\
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia\'92s last letter\
she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their\
being in love with each other, many weeks.\'94\
\
\'93But not before they went to Brighton?\'94\
\
\'93No, I believe not.\'94\
\
\'93And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? Does\
he know his real character?\'94\
\
\'93I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly\
did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad\
affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt;\
but I hope this may be false.\'94\
\
\'93Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him,\
this could not have happened!\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps it would have been better,\'94 replied her sister. \'93But to expose\
the former faults of any person without knowing what their present\
feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions.\'94\
\
\'93Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia\'92s note to his\
wife?\'94\
\
\'93He brought it with him for us to see.\'94\
\
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These\
were the contents:\
\
\'93MY DEAR HARRIET,\
\
\'93You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help\
laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am\
missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who,\
I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I\
love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think\
it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my\
going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater,\
when I write to them and sign my name \'91Lydia Wickham.\'92 What a good joke\
it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to\
Pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night.\
Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will\
dance with him at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall\
send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell\
Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are\
packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will\
drink to our good journey.\
\
\'93Your affectionate friend,\
\
\'93LYDIA BENNET.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!\'94 cried Elizabeth when she had\
finished it. \'93What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment!\
But at least it shows that _she_ was serious on the subject of their\
journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her\
side a _scheme_ of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!\'94\
\
\'93I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten\
minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in\
such confusion!\'94\
\
\'93Oh! Jane,\'94 cried Elizabeth, \'93was there a servant belonging to it who\
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?\'94\
\
\'93I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is\
very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to\
give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so\
much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly happen\
almost took from me my faculties.\'94\
\
\'93Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look\
well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety\
upon yourself alone.\'94\
\
\'93Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every\
fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them.\
Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much, that her hours\
of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Phillips came to Longbourn\
on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till\
Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all. And\
Lady Lucas has been very kind; she walked here on Wednesday morning to\
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters\'92, if\
they should be of use to us.\'94\
\
\'93She had better have stayed at home,\'94 cried Elizabeth; \'93perhaps she\
_meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see\
too little of one\'92s neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence\
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.\'94\
\
She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had\
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.\
\
\'93He meant I believe,\'94 replied Jane, \'93to go to Epsom, the place where\
they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if anything could\
be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the\
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come\
with a fare from London; and as he thought that the circumstance of a\
gentleman and lady\'92s removing from one carriage into another might\
be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow\
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he\
determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible\
to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any\
other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone,\
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding\
out even so much as this.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 48\
\
\
The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next\
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.\
His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and\
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion.\
They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to\
send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. Mr.\
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.\
\
When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant\
information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,\
to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as he could,\
to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only\
security for her husband\'92s not being killed in a duel.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few\
days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable\
to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a\
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also\
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of\
cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without\
reporting some fresh instance of Wickham\'92s extravagance or irregularity,\
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found\
them.\
\
All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months\
before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt\
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with\
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman\'92s family.\
Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world;\
and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the\
appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above\
half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of\
her sister\'92s ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less\
of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come\
when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely\
despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of\
them.\
\
Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife received a\
letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately\
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street;\
that Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival,\
but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now\
determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet\
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first\
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself\
did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was\
eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that Mr.\
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promised\
to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:\
\
\'93I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if\
possible, from some of the young man\'92s intimates in the regiment,\
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to\
know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were\
anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a\
clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have\
nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in\
his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps,\
Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any\
other person.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her\
authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information\
of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never\
heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both\
of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of\
his companions in the ----shire might be able to give more information;\
and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application\
was a something to look forward to.\
\
Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious\
part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters\
was the grand object of every morning\'92s impatience. Through letters,\
whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated, and every\
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.\
\
But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for\
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane\
had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence,\
she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his\
letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as\
follows:\
\
\'93MY DEAR SIR,\
\
\'93I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation\
in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now\
suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from\
Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself\
sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in\
your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because\
proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be\
wanting on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune--or that\
may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the\
most afflicting to a parent\'92s mind. The death of your daughter would\
have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to\
be lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte\
informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has\
proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time,\
for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think\
that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be\
guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be,\
you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined\
by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to\
whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that\
this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of\
all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says,\
will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads\
me moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event\
of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved\
in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to\
console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child\
from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her\
own heinous offense.\
\
\'93I am, dear sir, etc., etc.\'94\
\
Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer from\
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.\
It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship with whom he\
kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one\
living. His former acquaintances had been numerous; but since he\
had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of\
particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore,\
who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the\
wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for\
secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia\'92s relations, for\
it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a\
very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a\
thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton.\
He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more\
formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars\
from the Longbourn family. Jane heard them with horror. \'93A gamester!\'94\
 she cried. \'93This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it.\'94\
\
Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see their\
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered\
spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded\
to his brother-in-law\'92s entreaty that he would return to his family, and\
leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable\
for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did\
not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering\
what her anxiety for his life had been before.\
\
\'93What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?\'94 she cried. \'93Sure he\
will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham,\
and make him marry her, if he comes away?\'94\
\
As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she\
and the children should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet\
came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their\
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.\
\
Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her\
Derbyshire friend that had attended her from that part of the world. His\
name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and\
the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their\
being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had\
received none since her return that could come from Pemberley.\
\
The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for\
the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be\
fairly conjectured from _that_, though Elizabeth, who was by this time\
tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware\
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of\
Lydia\'92s infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought,\
one sleepless night out of two.\
\
When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual\
philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the\
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him\
away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of\
it.\
\
It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that\
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly\
expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, \'93Say\
nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing,\
and I ought to feel it.\'94\
\
\'93You must not be too severe upon yourself,\'94 replied Elizabeth.\
\
\'93You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone\
to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have\
been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.\
It will pass away soon enough.\'94\
\
\'93Do you suppose them to be in London?\'94\
\
\'93Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?\'94\
\
\'93And Lydia used to want to go to London,\'94 added Kitty.\
\
\'93She is happy then,\'94 said her father drily; \'93and her residence there\
will probably be of some duration.\'94\
\
Then after a short silence he continued:\
\
\'93Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me\
last May, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.\'94\
\
They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother\'92s\
tea.\
\
\'93This is a parade,\'94 he cried, \'93which does one good; it gives such an\
elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my\
library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as\
I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away.\'94\
\
\'93I am not going to run away, papa,\'94 said Kitty fretfully. \'93If I should\
ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.\'94\
\
\'93_You_ go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne\
for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be cautious, and\
you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter into\
my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be\
absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.\
And you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you have\
spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.\'94\
\
Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.\
\
\'93Well, well,\'94 said he, \'93do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good\
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of\
them.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 49\
\
\
Two days after Mr. Bennet\'92s return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking\
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper\
coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to their\
mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the expected summons,\
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, \'93I beg your pardon,\
madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some\
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.\'94\
\
\'93Dear madam,\'94 cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, \'93don\'92t you know\
there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here\
this half-hour, and master has had a letter.\'94\
\
Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They\
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the\
library; their father was in neither; and they were on the point of\
seeking him up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the\
butler, who said:\
\
\'93If you are looking for my master, ma\'92am, he is walking towards the\
little copse.\'94\
\
Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once\
more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately\
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.\
\
Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as\
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath,\
came up with him, and eagerly cried out:\
\
\'93Oh, papa, what news--what news? Have you heard from my uncle?\'94\
\
\'93Yes I have had a letter from him by express.\'94\
\
\'93Well, and what news does it bring--good or bad?\'94\
\
\'93What is there of good to be expected?\'94 said he, taking the letter from\
his pocket. \'93But perhaps you would like to read it.\'94\
\
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.\
\
\'93Read it aloud,\'94 said their father, \'93for I hardly know myself what it is\
about.\'94\
\
\'93Gracechurch Street, Monday, August 2.\
\
\'93MY DEAR BROTHER,\
\
\'93At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as,\
upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you\
left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of\
London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough\
to know they are discovered. I have seen them both--\'94\
\
\'93Then it is as I always hoped,\'94 cried Jane; \'93they are married!\'94\
\
Elizabeth read on:\
\
\'93I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there\
was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the\
engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will\
not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure\
to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand\
pounds secured among your children after the decease of yourself and\
my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her,\
during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions\
which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with,\
as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by\
express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You\
will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham\'92s\
circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be.\
The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there\
will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to\
settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude\
will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout\
the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to\
Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the\
smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at\
Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as\
fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it\
best that my niece should be married from this house, of which I hope\
you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as\
anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,\
\
\'93EDW. GARDINER.\'94\
\
\'93Is it possible?\'94 cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. \'93Can it be\
possible that he will marry her?\'94\
\
\'93Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him,\'94 said her\
sister. \'93My dear father, I congratulate you.\'94\
\
\'93And have you answered the letter?\'94 cried Elizabeth.\
\
\'93No; but it must be done soon.\'94\
\
Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he\
wrote.\
\
\'93Oh! my dear father,\'94 she cried, \'93come back and write immediately.\
Consider how important every moment is in such a case.\'94\
\
\'93Let me write for you,\'94 said Jane, \'93if you dislike the trouble\
yourself.\'94\
\
\'93I dislike it very much,\'94 he replied; \'93but it must be done.\'94\
\
And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.\
\
\'93And may I ask--\'94 said Elizabeth; \'93but the terms, I suppose, must be\
complied with.\'94\
\
\'93Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.\'94\
\
\'93And they _must_ marry! Yet he is _such_ a man!\'94\
\
\'93Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there\
are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how much money\
your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever\
to pay him.\'94\
\
\'93Money! My uncle!\'94 cried Jane, \'93what do you mean, sir?\'94\
\
\'93I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight a\
temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am\
gone.\'94\
\
\'93That is very true,\'94 said Elizabeth; \'93though it had not occurred to me\
before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh!\
it must be my uncle\'92s doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has\
distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.\'94\
\
\'93No,\'94 said her father; \'93Wickham\'92s a fool if he takes her with a farthing\
less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to think so ill of him,\
in the very beginning of our relationship.\'94\
\
\'93Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be\
repaid?\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued\
silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to the\
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.\
\
\'93And they are really to be married!\'94 cried Elizabeth, as soon as they\
were by themselves. \'93How strange this is! And for _this_ we are to be\
thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,\
and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!\'94\
\
\'93I comfort myself with thinking,\'94 replied Jane, \'93that he certainly would\
not marry Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind\
uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten\
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children\
of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand\
pounds?\'94\
\
\'93If he were ever able to learn what Wickham\'92s debts have been,\'94 said\
Elizabeth, \'93and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall\
exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has\
not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never\
be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal\
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as\
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is\
actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now,\
she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she\
first sees my aunt!\'94\
\
\'93We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,\'94 said\
Jane: \'93I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to\
marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of\
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself\
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in\
time make their past imprudence forgotten.\'94\
\
\'93Their conduct has been such,\'94 replied Elizabeth, \'93as neither you, nor\
I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it.\'94\
\
It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood\
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library,\
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make\
it known to her. He was writing and, without raising his head, coolly\
replied:\
\
\'93Just as you please.\'94\
\
\'93May we take my uncle\'92s letter to read to her?\'94\
\
\'93Take whatever you like, and get away.\'94\
\
Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went up stairs\
together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication\
would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news,\
the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As\
soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner\'92s hope of Lydia\'92s being soon\
married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its\
exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she\
had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter\
would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her\
felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.\
\
\'93My dear, dear Lydia!\'94 she cried. \'93This is delightful indeed! She will\
be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen!\
My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage\
everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the\
clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about\
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him\
how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell,\
Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear\
Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!\'94\
\
Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of\
these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr.\
Gardiner\'92s behaviour laid them all under.\
\
\'93For we must attribute this happy conclusion,\'94 she added, \'93in a great\
measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to\
assist Mr. Wickham with money.\'94\
\
\'93Well,\'94 cried her mother, \'93it is all very right; who should do it but\
her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children\
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have\
ever had anything from him, except a few presents. Well! I am so happy!\
In a short time I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well\
it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in\
such a flutter, that I am sure I can\'92t write; so I will dictate, and\
you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money\
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.\'94\
\
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and\
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had\
not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her\
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day\'92s delay, she observed,\
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite\
so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.\
\
\'93I will go to Meryton,\'94 said she, \'93as soon as I am dressed, and tell the\
good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call\
on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage.\
An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do\
anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you\
heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall\
all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.\'94\
\
Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her\
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took\
refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom.\
\
Poor Lydia\'92s situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was\
no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in\
looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could\
be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had\
feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had\
gained.\
\
\
\
Chapter 50\
\
\
Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life that,\
instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for\
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived\
him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that\
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever\
of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of\
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be\
her husband might then have rested in its proper place.\
\
He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone\
should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he\
was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance,\
and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.\
\
When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly\
useless, for, of course, they were to have a son. The son was to join\
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow\
and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters\
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.\
Bennet, for many years after Lydia\'92s birth, had been certain that he\
would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then\
too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her\
husband\'92s love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their\
income.\
\
Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and\
the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the\
latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with\
regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet\
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In\
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother,\
though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect\
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the\
engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed\
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would\
be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present\
arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the\
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket\
allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her\
through her mother\'92s hands, Lydia\'92s expenses had been very little within\
that sum.\
\
That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was\
another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as\
little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports\
of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he\
naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon\
dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick\
in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he\
was indebted to his brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any\
message to her.\
\
The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate\
speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent\
philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage\
of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the\
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant\
farmhouse. But there was much to be talked of in marrying her; and the\
good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had proceeded before from\
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit\
in this change of circumstances, because with such an husband her misery\
was considered certain.\
\
It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on this\
happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in\
spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her\
triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object\
of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of\
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those\
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and\
servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a\
proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or considering\
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and\
importance.\
\
\'93Haye Park might do,\'94 said she, \'93if the Gouldings could quit it--or the\
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is\
too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for\
Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.\'94\
\
Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the\
servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her: \'93Mrs.\
Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your son and\
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into _one_ house in this\
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the\
impudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.\'94\
\
A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm. It\
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,\
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his\
daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of\
affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend\
it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable\
resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without which her\
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she could believe\
possible. She was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new\
clothes must reflect on her daughter\'92s nuptials, than to any sense of\
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they\
took place.\
\
Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of\
the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for\
her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the\
proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its\
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the\
spot.\
\
She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were\
few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended;\
but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister\'92s\
frailty would have mortified her so much--not, however, from any fear\
of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate,\
there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia\'92s marriage been\
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that\
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other\
objection, would now be added an alliance and relationship of the\
nearest kind with a man whom he so justly scorned.\
\
From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The\
wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his\
feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a\
blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she\
hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no\
longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there\
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that\
she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they\
should meet.\
\
What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the\
proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now\
have been most gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she\
doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he was mortal,\
there must be a triumph.\
\
She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in\
disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and\
temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It\
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease\
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved;\
and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she\
must have received benefit of greater importance.\
\
But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what\
connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and\
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their\
family.\
\
How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence,\
she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could\
belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions\
were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.\
\
                          * * * * *\
\
Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet\'92s\
acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to\
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties\
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal\
purport of his letter was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved\
on quitting the militia.\
\
\'93It was greatly my wish that he should do so,\'94 he added, \'93as soon as\
his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in\
considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on\
his account and my niece\'92s. It is Mr. Wickham\'92s intention to go into\
the regulars; and among his former friends, there are still some who\
are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an\
ensigncy in General ----\'91s regiment, now quartered in the North. It\
is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He\
promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each\
have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have\
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements,\
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham\
in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I\
have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying\
similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin\
a list according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I\
hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions,\
and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment,\
unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs.\
Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she\
leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to\
you and her mother.--Yours, etc.,\
\
\'93E. GARDINER.\'94\
\
Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham\'92s removal\
from the ----shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet\
was not so well pleased with it. Lydia\'92s being settled in the North,\
just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company,\
for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in\
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a\
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted\
with everybody, and had so many favourites.\
\
\'93She is so fond of Mrs. Forster,\'94 said she, \'93it will be quite shocking\
to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she\
likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General ----\'91s\
regiment.\'94\
\
His daughter\'92s request, for such it might be considered, of being\
admitted into her family again before she set off for the North,\
received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth,\
who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister\'92s feelings and\
consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents,\
urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her\
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was\
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their\
mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show\
her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the\
North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent\
his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that as soon as\
the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was\
surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and\
had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would\
have been the last object of her wishes.\
\
\
\
Chapter 51\
\
\
Their sister\'92s wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her\
probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to\
meet them at ----, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their\
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially,\
who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she\
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister\
must endure.\
\
They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive\
them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage drove up to\
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,\
anxious, uneasy.\
\
Lydia\'92s voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and\
she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and\
welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile,\
to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy with an\
alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness.\
\
Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite\
so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely\
opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was\
enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet\
was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy,\
and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their\
congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly\
round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and\
observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been\
there.\
\
Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners\
were always so pleasing, that had his character and his marriage been\
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he\
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had\
not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down,\
resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence\
of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the\
two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.\
\
There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither\
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near\
Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood,\
with a good humoured ease which she felt very unable to equal in her\
replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the\
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led\
voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for\
the world.\
\
\'93Only think of its being three months,\'94 she cried, \'93since I went away;\
it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things\
enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure\
I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I\
thought it would be very good fun if I was.\'94\
\
Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked\
expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of\
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, \'93Oh! mamma, do the\
people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not;\
and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he\
should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to him, and took\
off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that\
he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room;\
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to\
the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with\
anxious parade, walk up to her mother\'92s right hand, and hear her say\
to her eldest sister, \'93Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go\
lower, because I am a married woman.\'94\
\
It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment\
from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good\
spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases, and\
all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called \'93Mrs. Wickham\'94\
 by each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner to show her\
ring, and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.\
\
\'93Well, mamma,\'94 said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast\
room, \'93and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I\
am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half\
my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get\
husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go.\'94\
\
\'93Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don\'92t\
at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, lord! yes;--there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all\
things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We\
shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some\
balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all.\'94\
\
\'93I should like it beyond anything!\'94 said her mother.\
\
\'93And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters\
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the\
winter is over.\'94\
\
\'93I thank you for my share of the favour,\'94 said Elizabeth; \'93but I do not\
particularly like your way of getting husbands.\'94\
\
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham\
had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join\
his regiment at the end of a fortnight.\
\
No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and\
she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and\
having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to\
all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did\
think, than such as did not.\
\
Wickham\'92s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected\
to find it; not equal to Lydia\'92s for him. She had scarcely needed her\
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that\
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love, rather\
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring\
for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain\
that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and\
if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity\
of having a companion.\
\
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every\
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did every\
thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on\
the first of September, than any body else in the country.\
\
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two\
elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth:\
\
\'93Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe. You\
were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you\
curious to hear how it was managed?\'94\
\
\'93No really,\'94 replied Elizabeth; \'93I think there cannot be too little said\
on the subject.\'94\
\
\'93La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were\
married, you know, at St. Clement\'92s, because Wickham\'92s lodgings were in\
that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven\
o\'92clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others\
were to meet us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in\
such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to\
put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was\
my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as\
if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in\
ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed\
to know whether he would be married in his blue coat.\'94\
\
\'93Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never\
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt\
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you\'92ll believe\
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a\
fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure London was\
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so\
just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon\
business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once\
they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I\
did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we\
were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he\
came back again in ten minutes\'92 time, and then we all set out. However,\
I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented going, the\
wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well.\'94\
\
\'93Mr. Darcy!\'94 repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.\
\
\'93Oh, yes!--he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious\
me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised\
them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!\'94\
\
\'93If it was to be secret,\'94 said Jane, \'93say not another word on the\
subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! certainly,\'94 said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; \'93we will\
ask you no questions.\'94\
\
\'93Thank you,\'94 said Lydia, \'93for if you did, I should certainly tell you\
all, and then Wickham would be angry.\'94\
\
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her\
power, by running away.\
\
But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least\
it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at\
her sister\'92s wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,\
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.\
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her\
brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as\
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She\
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,\
wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what\
Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been\
intended.\
\
\'93You may readily comprehend,\'94 she added, \'93what my curiosity must be\
to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively\
speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such\
a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,\
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems\
to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with\
ignorance.\'94\
\
\'93Not that I _shall_, though,\'94 she added to herself, as she finished\
the letter; \'93and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable\
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it\
out.\'94\
\
Jane\'92s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to\
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad\
of it;--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any\
satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.\
\
\
\
Chapter 52\
\
\
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as\
soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it\
than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to\
be interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to\
be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not\
contain a denial.\
\
\'93Gracechurch street, Sept. 6.\
\
\'93MY DEAR NIECE,\
\
\'93I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning\
to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing will not comprise\
what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your\
application; I did not expect it from _you_. Don\'92t think me angry,\
however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such\
inquiries to be necessary on _your_ side. If you do not choose to\
understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised\
as I am--and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned\
would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you are really\
innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit.\
\
\'93On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most\
unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with him several\
hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so\
dreadfully racked as _yours_ seems to have been. He came to tell Mr.\
Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were,\
and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly,\
Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day\
after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for\
them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to\
himself that Wickham\'92s worthlessness had not been so well known as to\
make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide\
in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and\
confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private\
actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He\
called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy\
an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he _had another_\
motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days\
in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to\
direct his search, which was more than _we_ had; and the consciousness\
of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.\
\
\'93There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago\
governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause\
of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large\
house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting\
lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with\
Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to\
town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he\
wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and\
corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found.\
Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and had\
she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up\
their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the\
wished-for direction. They were in ---- street. He saw Wickham, and\
afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he\
acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful\
situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed\
on to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go. But\
he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared\
for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear\
of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or\
other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings,\
it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which,\
in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learnt had never\
been _his_ design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment,\
on account of some debts of honour, which were very pressing; and\
scrupled not to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia\'92s flight on her\
own folly alone. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and as\
to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He\
must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have\
nothing to live on.\
\
\'93Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once. Though\
Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able\
to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited by\
marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still\
cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in\
some other country. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely\
to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.\
\
\'93They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of\
course wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be\
reasonable.\
\
\'93Every thing being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy\'92s next step was to\
make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch\
street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not be\
seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was\
still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge\
your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your\
uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the\
departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next\
day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.\
\
\'93On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home,\
and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.\
\
\'93They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It was not all\
settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to\
Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that\
obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been\
accused of many faults at different times, but _this_ is the true one.\
Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and\
I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your\
uncle would most readily have settled the whole.\
\
\'93They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either\
the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle\
was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his\
niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it,\
which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter\
this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation\
that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where\
it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane\
at most.\
\
\'93You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young\
people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably\
more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own\
settled upon _her_, and his commission purchased. The reason why all\
this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given above. It\
was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that\
Wickham\'92s character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he\
had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth\
in _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody\'92s_ reserve,\
can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking,\
my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would\
never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for _another\
interest_ in the affair.\
\
\'93When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who\
were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in\
London once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were\
then to receive the last finish.\
\
\'93I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which\
you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not\
afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant\
admission to the house. _He_ was exactly what he had been, when I\
knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was\
satisfied with her behaviour while she staid with us, if I had not\
perceived, by Jane\'92s letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming\
home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell\
you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most\
serious manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had\
done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she\
heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was\
sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and\
Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her.\
\
\'93Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you,\
attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave\
town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my\
dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold\
enough to say before) how much I like him. His behaviour to us has,\
in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. His\
understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little\
more liveliness, and _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his wife may teach\
him. I thought him very sly;--he hardly ever mentioned your name. But\
slyness seems the fashion.\
\
\'93Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not\
punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy\
till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice little\
pair of ponies, would be the very thing.\
\
\'93But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half\
hour.\
\
\'93Yours, very sincerely,\
\
\'93M. GARDINER.\'94\
\
The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,\
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the\
greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had\
produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister\'92s\
match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too\
great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the\
pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true!\
He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all\
the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which\
supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and\
despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason\
with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to\
avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had\
done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her\
heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a hope shortly\
checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her vanity\
was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her--for\
a woman who had already refused him--as able to overcome a sentiment so\
natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law\
of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. He had,\
to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had\
given a reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary\
stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he had been\
wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and\
though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she\
could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality for her might assist\
his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially\
concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were\
under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They\
owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to him. Oh!\
how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever\
encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For\
herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a cause\
of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of himself.\
She read over her aunt\'92s commendation of him again and again. It\
was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some\
pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she\
and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted\
between Mr. Darcy and herself.\
\
She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one\'92s\
approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was\
overtaken by Wickham.\
\
\'93I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?\'94 said he,\
as he joined her.\
\
\'93You certainly do,\'94 she replied with a smile; \'93but it does not follow\
that the interruption must be unwelcome.\'94\
\
\'93I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends; and\
now we are better.\'94\
\
\'93True. Are the others coming out?\'94\
\
\'93I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to\
Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that\
you have actually seen Pemberley.\'94\
\
She replied in the affirmative.\
\
\'93I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much\
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the\
old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of\
me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, she did.\'94\
\
\'93And what did she say?\'94\
\
\'93That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned\
out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely\
misrepresented.\'94\
\
\'93Certainly,\'94 he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had\
silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:\
\
\'93I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other\
several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.\'94\
\
\'93Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,\'94 said\
Elizabeth. \'93It must be something particular, to take him there at this\
time of year.\'94\
\
\'93Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I\
understood from the Gardiners that you had.\'94\
\
\'93Yes; he introduced us to his sister.\'94\
\
\'93And do you like her?\'94\
\
\'93Very much.\'94\
\
\'93I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year\
or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad\
you liked her. I hope she will turn out well.\'94\
\
\'93I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.\'94\
\
\'93Did you go by the village of Kympton?\'94\
\
\'93I do not recollect that we did.\'94\
\
\'93I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A\
most delightful place!--Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited\
me in every respect.\'94\
\
\'93How should you have liked making sermons?\'94\
\
\'93Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty,\
and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to\
repine;--but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The\
quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas\
of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the\
circumstance, when you were in Kent?\'94\
\
\'93I have heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was\
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.\'94\
\
\'93You have. Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the\
first, you may remember.\'94\
\
\'93I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not\
so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually\
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business\
had been compromised accordingly.\'94\
\
\'93You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember\
what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.\'94\
\
They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast\
to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister\'92s sake, to provoke him,\
she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:\
\
\'93Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let\
us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one\
mind.\'94\
\
She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though\
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.\
\
\
\
Chapter 53\
\
\
Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he\
never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth,\
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she\
had said enough to keep him quiet.\
\
The day of his and Lydia\'92s departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was\
forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means\
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to\
continue at least a twelvemonth.\
\
\'93Oh! my dear Lydia,\'94 she cried, \'93when shall we meet again?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, lord! I don\'92t know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.\'94\
\
\'93Write to me very often, my dear.\'94\
\
\'93As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for\
writing. My sisters may write to _me_. They will have nothing else to\
do.\'94\
\
Mr. Wickham\'92s adieus were much more affectionate than his wife\'92s. He\
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.\
\
\'93He is as fine a fellow,\'94 said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of\
the house, \'93as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to\
us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas\
himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.\'94\
\
The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days.\
\
\'93I often think,\'94 said she, \'93that there is nothing so bad as parting with\
one\'92s friends. One seems so forlorn without them.\'94\
\
\'93This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a daughter,\'94 said\
Elizabeth. \'93It must make you better satisfied that your other four are\
single.\'94\
\
\'93It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married,\
but only because her husband\'92s regiment happens to be so far off. If\
that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.\'94\
\
But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly\
relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an\
article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper\
at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her\
master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several\
weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and\
smiled and shook her head by turns.\
\
\'93Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,\'94 (for Mrs.\
Phillips first brought her the news). \'93Well, so much the better. Not\
that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am\
sure _I_ never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome\
to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what _may_ happen?\
But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to\
mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?\'94\
\
\'93You may depend on it,\'94 replied the other, \'93for Mrs. Nicholls was in\
Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose\
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He\
comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was\
going to the butcher\'92s, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on\
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.\'94\
\
Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing\
colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to\
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said:\
\
\'93I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present\
report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don\'92t imagine it was from\
any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that\
I _should_ be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect\
me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes\
alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of\
_myself_, but I dread other people\'92s remarks.\'94\
\
Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in\
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no\
other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial\
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming\
there _with_ his friend\'92s permission, or being bold enough to come\
without it.\
\
\'93Yet it is hard,\'94 she sometimes thought, \'93that this poor man cannot\
come to a house which he has legally hired, without raising all this\
speculation! I _will_ leave him to himself.\'94\
\
In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her\
feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily\
perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed,\
more unequal, than she had often seen them.\
\
The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,\
about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.\
\
\'93As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, \'93you\
will wait on him of course.\'94\
\
\'93No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I\
went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in\
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool\'92s errand again.\'94\
\
His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention\
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to\
Netherfield.\
\
\'93\'91Tis an etiquette I despise,\'94 said he. \'93If he wants our society,\
let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend my hours\
in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back\
again.\'94\
\
\'93Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait\
on him. But, however, that shan\'92t prevent my asking him to dine here, I\
am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will\
make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for\
him.\'94\
\
Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her\
husband\'92s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her\
neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before\
_they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,--\
\
\'93I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,\'94 said Jane to her sister. \'93It\
would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference, but I can\
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;\
but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she\
says. Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!\'94\
\
\'93I wish I could say anything to comfort you,\'94 replied Elizabeth; \'93but it\
is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction\
of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have\
always so much.\'94\
\
Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants,\
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety\
and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. She counted\
the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent;\
hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his\
arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him, from her dressing-room window,\
enter the paddock and ride towards the house.\
\
Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely\
kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went\
to the window--she looked,--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down\
again by her sister.\
\
\'93There is a gentleman with him, mamma,\'94 said Kitty; \'93who can it be?\'94\
\
\'93Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not\
know.\'94\
\
\'93La!\'94 replied Kitty, \'93it looks just like that man that used to be with\
him before. Mr. what\'92s-his-name. That tall, proud man.\'94\
\
\'93Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of\
Mr. Bingley\'92s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must\
say that I hate the very sight of him.\'94\
\
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little\
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness\
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time\
after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable\
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their\
mother talked on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be\
civil to him only as Mr. Bingley\'92s friend, without being heard by either\
of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be\
suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew Mrs.\
Gardiner\'92s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him.\
To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,\
and whose merit she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive\
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted\
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an\
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just as\
what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming--at his\
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,\
was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered\
behaviour in Derbyshire.\
\
The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half a\
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to\
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and\
wishes must still be unshaken. But she would not be secure.\
\
\'93Let me first see how he behaves,\'94 said she; \'93it will then be early\
enough for expectation.\'94\
\
She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to\
lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of\
her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little\
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the\
gentlemen\'92s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with\
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any\
symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.\
\
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down\
again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She\
had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious, as usual; and,\
she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as\
she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother\'92s\
presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but\
not an improbable, conjecture.\
\
Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period\
saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs.\
Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed,\
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of\
her curtsey and address to his friend.\
\
Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter\
the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy,\
was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill\
applied.\
\
Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question\
which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely anything. He\
was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but\
it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends,\
when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed without\
bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist\
the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often\
found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but\
the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when\
they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry\
with herself for being so.\
\
\'93Could I expect it to be otherwise!\'94 said she. \'93Yet why did he come?\'94\
\
She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to\
him she had hardly courage to speak.\
\
She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.\
\
\'93It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet.\
\
He readily agreed to it.\
\
\'93I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People _did_ say\
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope\
it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood,\
since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my\
own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have\
seen it in the papers. It was in The Times and The Courier, I know;\
though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, \'91Lately,\
George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,\'92 without there being a\
syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything.\
It was my brother Gardiner\'92s drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to\
make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?\'94\
\
Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth\
dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could\
not tell.\
\
\'93It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,\'94\
 continued her mother, \'93but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very\
hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone down to\
Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay\
I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have\
heard of his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the\
regulars. Thank Heaven! he has _some_ friends, though perhaps not so\
many as he deserves.\'94\
\
Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such\
misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her,\
however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually\
done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in\
the country at present. A few weeks, he believed.\
\
\'93When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,\'94 said her mother,\
\'93I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Mr.\
Bennet\'92s manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and\
will save all the best of the covies for you.\'94\
\
Elizabeth\'92s misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious\
attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had\
flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be\
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt\
that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for\
moments of such painful confusion.\
\
\'93The first wish of my heart,\'94 said she to herself, \'93is never more to\
be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure\
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either\
one or the other again!\'94\
\
Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no\
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing\
how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the admiration of her\
former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little;\
but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He\
found her as handsome as she had been last year; as good natured, and\
as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no\
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded\
that she talked as much as ever. But her mind was so busily engaged,\
that she did not always know when she was silent.\
\
When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her\
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at\
Longbourn in a few days time.\
\
\'93You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley,\'94 she added, \'93for when\
you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with\
us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure\
you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep\
your engagement.\'94\
\
Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of\
his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.\
\
Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine\
there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did\
not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man\
on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride\
of one who had ten thousand a year.\
\
\
\
Chapter 54\
\
\
As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits;\
or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that\
must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy\'92s behaviour astonished and vexed her.\
\
\'93Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,\'94 said she,\
\'93did he come at all?\'94\
\
She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.\
\
\'93He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when\
he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If\
he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will\
think no more about him.\'94\
\
Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach\
of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which showed her\
better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.\
\
\'93Now,\'94 said she, \'93that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly\
easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by\
his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly\
seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent\
acquaintance.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, very indifferent indeed,\'94 said Elizabeth, laughingly. \'93Oh, Jane,\
take care.\'94\
\
\'93My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?\'94\
\
\'93I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with\
you as ever.\'94\
\
                          * * * * *\
\
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in\
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good\
humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour\'92s visit, had\
revived.\
\
On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two\
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality\
as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the\
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take\
the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by\
her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore\
to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to\
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was\
decided. He placed himself by her.\
\
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend.\
He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that\
Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes\
likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing\
alarm.\
\
His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an\
admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded\
Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane\'92s happiness, and his\
own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the\
consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It\
gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in\
no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table\
could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little\
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to\
advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but\
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and\
cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother\'92s ungraciousness,\
made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth\'92s mind;\
and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell\
him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the\
family.\
\
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of\
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away\
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than\
the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious\
and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the\
gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her\
uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all\
her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.\
\
\'93If he does not come to me, _then_,\'94 said she, \'93I shall give him up for\
ever.\'94\
\
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have\
answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table,\
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,\
in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her\
which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen\'92s approaching, one of\
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:\
\
\'93The men shan\'92t come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;\
do we?\'94\
\
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with\
her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough\
to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for\
being so silly!\
\
\'93A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to\
expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who would not\
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?\
There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!\'94\
\
She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee cup\
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:\
\
\'93Is your sister at Pemberley still?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, she will remain there till Christmas.\'94\
\
\'93And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?\'94\
\
\'93Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough,\
these three weeks.\'94\
\
She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse\
with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for\
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady\'92s whispering\
to Elizabeth again, he walked away.\
\
When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the ladies\
all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him,\
when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her\
mother\'92s rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated\
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.\
They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had\
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side\
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.\
\
Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to\
supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the\
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.\
\
\'93Well girls,\'94 said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, \'93What\
say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well,\
I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The\
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said they never saw so\
fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the\
Lucases\'92 last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges\
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French\
cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater\
beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And\
what do you think she said besides? \'91Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her\
at Netherfield at last.\'92 She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good\
a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls,\
and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of\
Bingley\'92s behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would get him at\
last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy\
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at\
not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.\
\
\'93It has been a very agreeable day,\'94 said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. \'93The\
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we\
may often meet again.\'94\
\
Elizabeth smiled.\
\
\'93Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me.\
I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an\
agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am\
perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had\
any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed\
with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally\
pleasing, than any other man.\'94\
\
\'93You are very cruel,\'94 said her sister, \'93you will not let me smile, and\
are provoking me to it every moment.\'94\
\
\'93How hard it is in some cases to be believed!\'94\
\
\'93And how impossible in others!\'94\
\
\'93But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I\
acknowledge?\'94\
\
\'93That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to\
instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive\
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your confidante.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 55\
\
\
A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His\
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in\
ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably\
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many\
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.\
\
\'93Next time you call,\'94 said she, \'93I hope we shall be more lucky.\'94\
\
He should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she would\
give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.\
\
\'93Can you come to-morrow?\'94\
\
Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was\
accepted with alacrity.\
\
He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them\
dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughter\'92s room, in her dressing\
gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out:\
\
\'93My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bingley is\
come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss\
Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss\
Lizzy\'92s hair.\'94\
\
\'93We will be down as soon as we can,\'94 said Jane; \'93but I dare say Kitty is\
forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour ago.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be quick!\
Where is your sash, my dear?\'94\
\
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down\
without one of her sisters.\
\
The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the\
evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his\
custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of\
the five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at\
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any\
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last\
Kitty did, she very innocently said, \'93What is the matter mamma? What do\
you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?\'94\
\
\'93Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you.\'94 She then sat still\
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she\
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, \'93Come here, my love, I want to\
speak to you,\'94 took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look\
at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her\
entreaty that _she_ would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs.\
Bennet half-opened the door and called out:\
\
\'93Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was forced to go.\
\
\'93We may as well leave them by themselves you know;\'94 said her mother, as\
soon as she was in the hall. \'93Kitty and I are going up stairs to sit in\
my dressing-room.\'94\
\
Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained\
quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned\
into the drawing-room.\
\
Mrs. Bennet\'92s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was every\
thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter. His\
ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their\
evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the\
mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command\
of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.\
\
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went\
away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs.\
Bennet\'92s means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.\
\
After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed\
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in\
the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy\
returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably\
persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman\'92s\
concurrence.\
\
Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent\
the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more\
agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption\
or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into\
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the\
other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner;\
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet\'92s invention was again at work to get\
every body away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter\
to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea;\
for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be\
wanted to counteract her mother\'92s schemes.\
\
But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she\
saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother\
had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her\
sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in\
earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of\
both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would\
have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but _hers_ she\
thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and\
Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as\
well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few\
words to her sister, ran out of the room.\
\
Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give\
pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest\
emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.\
\
\'93\'91Tis too much!\'94 she added, \'93by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh!\
why is not everybody as happy?\'94\
\
Elizabeth\'92s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth,\
a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of\
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not\
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be\
said for the present.\
\
\'93I must go instantly to my mother;\'94 she cried. \'93I would not on any\
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it\
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to\
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear\
family! how shall I bear so much happiness!\'94\
\
She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the\
card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.\
\
Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease\
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many\
previous months of suspense and vexation.\
\
\'93And this,\'94 said she, \'93is the end of all his friend\'92s anxious\
circumspection! of all his sister\'92s falsehood and contrivance! the\
happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!\'94\
\
In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her\
father had been short and to the purpose.\
\
\'93Where is your sister?\'94 said he hastily, as he opened the door.\
\
\'93With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.\'94\
\
He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes\
and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed\
her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with\
great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen\
to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane\'92s perfections;\
and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his\
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for\
basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of\
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and\
himself.\
\
It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of\
Miss Bennet\'92s mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to her face, as\
made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped\
her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent or\
speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings,\
though she talked to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when\
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed\
how really happy he was.\
\
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their\
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he\
turned to his daughter, and said:\
\
\'93Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.\'94\
\
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his\
goodness.\
\
\'93You are a good girl;\'94 he replied, \'93and I have great pleasure in\
thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your\
doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are\
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so\
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will\
always exceed your income.\'94\
\
\'93I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be\
unpardonable in me.\'94\
\
\'93Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,\'94 cried his wife, \'93what are you\
talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely\
more.\'94 Then addressing her daughter, \'93Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I am so\
happy! I am sure I shan\'92t get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it\
would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not\
be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when\
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was\
that you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that\
ever was seen!\'94\
\
Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her\
favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her younger\
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness\
which she might in future be able to dispense.\
\
Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty\
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.\
\
Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;\
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after\
supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough\
detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he thought himself\
obliged to accept.\
\
Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for\
while he was present, Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else;\
but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those hours\
of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he\
always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of\
her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of\
relief.\
\
\'93He has made me so happy,\'94 said she, one evening, \'93by telling me that he\
was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed\
it possible.\'94\
\
\'93I suspected as much,\'94 replied Elizabeth. \'93But how did he account for\
it?\'94\
\
\'93It must have been his sister\'92s doing. They were certainly no friends to\
his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have\
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see,\
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will\
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we\
can never be what we once were to each other.\'94\
\
\'93That is the most unforgiving speech,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93that I ever\
heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again\
the dupe of Miss Bingley\'92s pretended regard.\'94\
\
\'93Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November,\
he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being\
indifferent would have prevented his coming down again!\'94\
\
\'93He made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of his\
modesty.\'94\
\
This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and\
the little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was pleased\
to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for,\
though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she\
knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him.\
\
\'93I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!\'94 cried\
Jane. \'93Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed\
above them all! If I could but see _you_ as happy! If there _were_ but\
such another man for you!\'94\
\
\'93If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as\
you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your\
happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very\
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.\'94\
\
The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a\
secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips,\
and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her\
neighbours in Meryton.\
\
The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the\
world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,\
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.\
\
\
\
Chapter 56\
\
\
One morning, about a week after Bingley\'92s engagement with Jane had been\
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the\
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by the\
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up\
the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, the\
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses\
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who\
preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that\
somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid\
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the\
shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three\
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown\
open and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.\
\
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their\
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.\
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even\
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.\
\
She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no\
other reply to Elizabeth\'92s salutation than a slight inclination of the\
head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her\
name to her mother on her ladyship\'92s entrance, though no request of\
introduction had been made.\
\
Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such\
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting\
for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,\
\
\'93I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your\
mother.\'94\
\
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.\
\
\'93And _that_ I suppose is one of your sisters.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, madam,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to Lady Catherine.\
\'93She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married,\
and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man\
who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.\'94\
\
\'93You have a very small park here,\'94 returned Lady Catherine after a short\
silence.\
\
\'93It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I\
assure you it is much larger than Sir William Lucas\'92s.\'94\
\
\'93This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in\
summer; the windows are full west.\'94\
\
Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner, and then\
added:\
\
\'93May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. and\
Mrs. Collins well.\'94\
\
\'93Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.\'94\
\
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from\
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no\
letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.\
\
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some\
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,\
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,\
\
\'93Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness\
on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you\
will favour me with your company.\'94\
\
\'93Go, my dear,\'94 cried her mother, \'93and show her ladyship about the\
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.\'94\
\
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol,\
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the\
hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and\
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent\
looking rooms, walked on.\
\
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her\
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk\
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for\
conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and\
disagreeable.\
\
\'93How could I ever think her like her nephew?\'94 said she, as she looked in\
her face.\
\
As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following\
manner:--\
\
\'93You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my\
journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I\
come.\'94\
\
Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.\
\
\'93Indeed, you are mistaken, Madam. I have not been at all able to account\
for the honour of seeing you here.\'94\
\
\'93Miss Bennet,\'94 replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, \'93you ought to\
know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere _you_ may\
choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character has ever been\
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such\
moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most\
alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told that not only your\
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that\
you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon\
afterwards united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I\
_know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him\
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved\
on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to\
you.\'94\
\
\'93If you believed it impossible to be true,\'94 said Elizabeth, colouring\
with astonishment and disdain, \'93I wonder you took the trouble of coming\
so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?\'94\
\
\'93At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.\'94\
\
\'93Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,\'94 said Elizabeth\
coolly, \'93will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report\
is in existence.\'94\
\
\'93If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been\
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a\
report is spread abroad?\'94\
\
\'93I never heard that it was.\'94\
\
\'93And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?\'94\
\
\'93I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship. You may\
ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.\'94\
\
\'93This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has\
he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?\'94\
\
\'93Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.\'94\
\
\'93It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his\
reason. But your arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,\
have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You\
may have drawn him in.\'94\
\
\'93If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.\'94\
\
\'93Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such\
language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world,\
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.\'94\
\
\'93But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as this,\
ever induce me to be explicit.\'94\
\
\'93Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the\
presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is\
engaged to my daughter. Now what have you to say?\'94\
\
\'93Only this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will\
make an offer to me.\'94\
\
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:\
\
\'93The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy,\
they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of\
_his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we planned\
the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would\
be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a young woman of\
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to\
the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his\
tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of\
propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his earliest\
hours he was destined for his cousin?\'94\
\
\'93Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is\
no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not\
be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to\
marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the\
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither\
by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make\
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?\'94\
\
\'93Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes,\
Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or\
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will\
be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him.\
Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned\
by any of us.\'94\
\
\'93These are heavy misfortunes,\'94 replied Elizabeth. \'93But the wife of Mr.\
Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily\
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause\
to repine.\'94\
\
\'93Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude\
for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that\
score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came\
here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will\
I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person\'92s\
whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.\'94\
\
\'93_That_ will make your ladyship\'92s situation at present more pitiable;\
but it will have no effect on me.\'94\
\
\'93I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my\
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal\
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father\'92s, from respectable,\
honourable, and ancient--though untitled--families. Their fortune on\
both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of\
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?\
The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections,\
or fortune. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you\
were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in\
which you have been brought up.\'94\
\
\'93In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that\
sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman\'92s daughter; so far we are\
equal.\'94\
\
\'93True. You _are_ a gentleman\'92s daughter. But who was your mother?\
Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their\
condition.\'94\
\
\'93Whatever my connections may be,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93if your nephew does\
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.\'94\
\
\'93Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?\'94\
\
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady\
Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a\
moment\'92s deliberation:\
\
\'93I am not.\'94\
\
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.\
\
\'93And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?\'94\
\
\'93I will make no promise of the kind.\'94\
\
\'93Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more\
reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that\
I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the\
assurance I require.\'94\
\
\'93And I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into\
anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry\
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make their\
marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would\
my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin?\
Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have\
supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the\
application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if\
you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your\
nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell;\
but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg,\
therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject.\'94\
\
\'93Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the\
objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am\
no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister\'92s infamous\
elopement. I know it all; that the young man\'92s marrying her was a\
patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is\
such a girl to be my nephew\'92s sister? Is her husband, is the son of his\
late father\'92s steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of what are\
you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?\'94\
\
\'93You can now have nothing further to say,\'94 she resentfully answered.\
\'93You have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg to return to\
the house.\'94\
\
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned\
back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.\
\
\'93You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!\
Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you\
must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?\'94\
\
\'93Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.\'94\
\
\'93You are then resolved to have him?\'94\
\
\'93I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner,\
which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without\
reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.\'94\
\
\'93It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the\
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in\
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.\'94\
\
\'93Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,\'94 replied Elizabeth, \'93have any\
possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either\
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the\
resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former\
_were_ excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment\'92s\
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in\
the scorn.\'94\
\
\'93And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well.\
I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your\
ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you\
reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point.\'94\
\
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of\
the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, \'93I take no leave\
of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve\
no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.\'94\
\
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her\
ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She\
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother\
impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady\
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.\
\
\'93She did not choose it,\'94 said her daughter, \'93she would go.\'94\
\
\'93She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously\
civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were\
well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing through\
Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had\
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?\'94\
\
Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to\
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.\
\
\
\
Chapter 57\
\
\
The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw\
Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many\
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it\
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,\
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.\
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report\
of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;\
till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,\
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the\
expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply\
the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her\
sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours\
at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the\
Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had\
only set that down as almost certain and immediate, which she had looked\
forward to as possible at some future time.\
\
In revolving Lady Catherine\'92s expressions, however, she could not help\
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting\
in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to\
prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate\
an application to her nephew; and how _he_ might take a similar\
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her, she dared\
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his\
aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose\
that he thought much higher of her ladyship than _she_ could do; and it\
was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_,\
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would\
address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would\
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak\
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.\
\
If he had been wavering before as to what he should do, which had often\
seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might\
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity\
unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady\
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to\
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.\
\
\'93If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his\
friend within a few days,\'94 she added, \'93I shall know how to understand\
it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his\
constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might\
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him\
at all.\'94\
\
                          * * * * *\
\
The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had\
been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same\
kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet\'92s curiosity; and\
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.\
\
The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her\
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.\
\
\'93Lizzy,\'94 said he, \'93I was going to look for you; come into my room.\'94\
\
She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to\
tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner\
connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it\
might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the\
consequent explanations.\
\
She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He\
then said,\
\
\'93I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me\
exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its\
contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink\
of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.\'94\
\
The colour now rushed into Elizabeth\'92s cheeks in the instantaneous\
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;\
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained\
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to\
herself; when her father continued:\
\
\'93You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters\
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity, to discover the\
name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins.\'94\
\
\'93From Mr. Collins! and what can _he_ have to say?\'94\
\
\'93Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with\
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of\
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping\
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says\
on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows: \'91Having thus\
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on\
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another;\
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter\
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after\
her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may\
be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in\
this land.\'92\
\
\'93Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? \'91This young\
gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of\
mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive\
patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin\
Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate\
closure with this gentleman\'92s proposals, which, of course, you will be\
inclined to take immediate advantage of.\'92\
\
\'93Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out:\
\
\'93\'91My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine\
that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with\
a friendly eye.\'92\
\
\'93_Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_\
surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within\
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie\
more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any\
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his\
life! It is admirable!\'94\
\
Elizabeth tried to join in her father\'92s pleasantry, but could only force\
one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so\
little agreeable to her.\
\
\'93Are you not diverted?\'94\
\
\'93Oh! yes. Pray read on.\'94\
\
\'93\'91After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last\
night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she\
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some\
family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her\
consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty\
to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and\
her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run\
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.\'92 Mr.\
Collins moreover adds, \'91I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia\'92s sad\
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their\
living together before the marriage took place should be so generally\
known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain\
from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young\
couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an\
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should\
very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them,\
as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their\
names to be mentioned in your hearing.\'92 That is his notion of Christian\
forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte\'92s\
situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you\
look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be _missish_,\
I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we\
live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our\
turn?\'94\
\
\'93Oh!\'94 cried Elizabeth, \'93I am excessively diverted. But it is so\
strange!\'94\
\
\'93Yes--_that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man\
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference, and _your_\
pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate\
writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins\'92s correspondence for any\
consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving\
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and\
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine\
about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?\'94\
\
To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had\
been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by\
his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her\
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she\
would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by\
what he said of Mr. Darcy\'92s indifference, and she could do nothing but\
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of\
his seeing too little, she might have fancied too much.\
\
\
\
Chapter 58\
\
\
Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as\
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy\
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine\'92s\
visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time\
to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat\
in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed\
their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the\
habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five\
set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others\
to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy\
were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty\
was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a\
desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same.\
\
They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon\
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,\
when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the\
moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was\
high, she immediately said:\
\
\'93Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving\
relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding yours. I\
can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my\
poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to\
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest\
of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.\'94\
\
\'93I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,\'94 replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise\
and emotion, \'93that you have ever been informed of what may, in a\
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner\
was so little to be trusted.\'94\
\
\'93You must not blame my aunt. Lydia\'92s thoughtlessness first betrayed to\
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could\
not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,\
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced\
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the\
sake of discovering them.\'94\
\
\'93If you _will_ thank me,\'94 he replied, \'93let it be for yourself alone.\
That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other\
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your\
_family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought\
only of _you_.\'94\
\
Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause,\
her companion added, \'93You are too generous to trifle with me. If your\
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. _My_\
affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence\
me on this subject for ever.\'94\
\
Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of\
his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not\
very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone\
so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as to make\
her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The\
happiness which this reply produced, was such as he had probably never\
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as\
warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth\
been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the\
expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over his face, became him;\
but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told her of\
feelings, which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his\
affection every moment more valuable.\
\
They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to\
be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She\
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding\
to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through\
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the\
substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on\
every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship\'92s apprehension,\
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that\
such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise\
from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily for her\
ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.\
\
\'93It taught me to hope,\'94 said he, \'93as I had scarcely ever allowed myself\
to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain that,\
had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have\
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly.\'94\
\
Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, \'93Yes, you know enough\
of my frankness to believe me capable of _that_. After abusing you so\
abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all\
your relations.\'94\
\
\'93What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your\
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my\
behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was\
unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.\'94\
\
\'93We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that\
evening,\'94 said Elizabeth. \'93The conduct of neither, if strictly examined,\
will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improved\
in civility.\'94\
\
\'93I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I\
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of\
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your\
reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: \'91had you behaved in a\
more gentlemanlike manner.\'92 Those were your words. You know not, you can\
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me;--though it was some time,\
I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.\'94\
\
\'93I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an\
impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such\
a way.\'94\
\
\'93I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper\
feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never\
forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible\
way that would induce you to accept me.\'94\
\
\'93Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at\
all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.\'94\
\
Darcy mentioned his letter. \'93Did it,\'94 said he, \'93did it soon make you\
think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its\
contents?\'94\
\
She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually all her\
former prejudices had been removed.\
\
\'93I knew,\'94 said he, \'93that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was\
necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part\
especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the\
power of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might\
justly make you hate me.\'94\
\
\'93The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the\
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my\
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily\
changed as that implies.\'94\
\
\'93When I wrote that letter,\'94 replied Darcy, \'93I believed myself perfectly\
calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a\
dreadful bitterness of spirit.\'94\
\
\'93The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The\
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings\
of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now\
so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant\
circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some\
of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you\
pleasure.\'94\
\
\'93I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your\
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment\
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of\
innocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude\
which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled. I have been a selfish\
being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I\
was taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I\
was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.\
Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), I was spoilt\
by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all\
that was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught\
me to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own family\
circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least\
to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I\
was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still have been\
but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You\
taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you,\
I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception.\
You showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman\
worthy of being pleased.\'94\
\
\'93Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?\'94\
\
\'93Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be\
wishing, expecting my addresses.\'94\
\
\'93My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure\
you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me\
wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_ evening?\'94\
\
\'93Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began to take\
a proper direction.\'94\
\
\'93I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met at\
Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?\'94\
\
\'93No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise.\'94\
\
\'93Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you.\
My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I\
confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due.\'94\
\
\'93My object then,\'94 replied Darcy, \'93was to show you, by every civility in\
my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to\
obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you\
see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes\
introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an\
hour after I had seen you.\'94\
\
He then told her of Georgiana\'92s delight in her acquaintance, and of her\
disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to\
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of\
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed\
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness\
there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must\
comprehend.\
\
She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to\
each, to be dwelt on farther.\
\
After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know\
anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that\
it was time to be at home.\
\
\'93What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!\'94 was a wonder which\
introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted with\
their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of\
it.\
\
\'93I must ask whether you were surprised?\'94 said Elizabeth.\
\
\'93Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.\'94\
\
\'93That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.\'94 And\
though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much\
the case.\
\
\'93On the evening before my going to London,\'94 said he, \'93I made a\
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I\
told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his\
affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had\
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself\
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent\
to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was\
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his\
friend.\
\
\'93Did you speak from your own observation,\'94 said she, \'93when you told him\
that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?\'94\
\
\'93From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits\
which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of her affection.\'94\
\
\'93And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to\
him.\'94\
\
\'93It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had\
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but\
his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to confess\
one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not\
allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months\
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was\
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained\
in any doubt of your sister\'92s sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me\
now.\'94\
\
Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful\
friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked\
herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at,\
and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness\
of Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he\
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they\
parted.\
\
\
\
Chapter 59\
\
\
\'93My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?\'94 was a question\
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room,\
and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to\
say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own\
knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything\
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.\
\
The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The\
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent.\
Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth;\
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy\
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,\
there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt\
in the family when her situation became known; she was aware that no\
one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a\
dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.\
\
At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far\
from Miss Bennet\'92s general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.\
\
\'93You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!--engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no,\
you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.\'94\
\
\'93This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and\
I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am\
in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are\
engaged.\'94\
\
Jane looked at her doubtingly. \'93Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much\
you dislike him.\'94\
\
\'93You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I\
did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as\
these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever\
remember it myself.\'94\
\
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more\
seriously assured her of its truth.\
\
\'93Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,\'94 cried\
Jane. \'93My dear, dear Lizzy, I would--I do congratulate you--but are you\
certain? forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be\
happy with him?\'94\
\
\'93There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that\
we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased,\
Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?\'94\
\
\'93Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more\
delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you\
really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than\
marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought\
to do?\'94\
\
\'93Oh, yes! You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do, when I\
tell you all.\'94\
\
\'93What do you mean?\'94\
\
\'93Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am\
afraid you will be angry.\'94\
\
\'93My dearest sister, now _be_ serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let\
me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me\
how long you have loved him?\'94\
\
\'93It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began.\
But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds\
at Pemberley.\'94\
\
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the\
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances\
of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing\
further to wish.\
\
\'93Now I am quite happy,\'94 said she, \'93for you will be as happy as myself.\
I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you,\
I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley\'92s friend and your\
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But\
Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you\
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know\
of it to another, not to you.\'94\
\
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling\
to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made\
her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer\
conceal from her his share in Lydia\'92s marriage. All was acknowledged,\
and half the night spent in conversation.\
\
                          * * * * *\
\
\'93Good gracious!\'94 cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next\
morning, \'93if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with\
our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always\
coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or\
other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him?\
Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley\'92s\
way.\'94\
\
Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet\
was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an\
epithet.\
\
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and\
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;\
and he soon afterwards said aloud, \'93Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes\
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?\'94\
\
\'93I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,\'94 said Mrs. Bennet, \'93to walk\
to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has\
never seen the view.\'94\
\
\'93It may do very well for the others,\'94 replied Mr. Bingley; \'93but I am\
sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won\'92t it, Kitty?\'94 Kitty owned that\
she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see\
the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went\
up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying:\
\
\'93I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that\
disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is\
all for Jane\'92s sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking\
to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to\
inconvenience.\'94\
\
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet\'92s consent should be\
asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the\
application for her mother\'92s. She could not determine how her mother\
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur\
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she\
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it\
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit\
to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear\
the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her\
disapprobation.\
\
                          * * * * *\
\
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw\
Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was\
extreme. She did not fear her father\'92s opposition, but he was going to\
be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means--that _she_,\
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be\
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her--was a wretched\
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,\
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes\
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while\
pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, \'93Go to your father, he\
wants you in the library.\'94 She was gone directly.\
\
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.\
\'93Lizzy,\'94 said he, \'93what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be\
accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?\'94\
\
How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more\
reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from\
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;\
but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion,\
of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.\
\
\'93Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be\
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.\
But will they make you happy?\'94\
\
\'93Have you any other objection,\'94 said Elizabeth, \'93than your belief of my\
indifference?\'94\
\
\'93None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but\
this would be nothing if you really liked him.\'94\
\
\'93I do, I do like him,\'94 she replied, with tears in her eyes, \'93I love him.\
Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not\
know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in\
such terms.\'94\
\
\'93Lizzy,\'94 said her father, \'93I have given him my consent. He is the kind\
of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he\
condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on\
having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know\
your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor\
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked\
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the\
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape\
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing\
_you_ unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are\
about.\'94\
\
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and\
at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object\
of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of\
him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection\
was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months\'92\
suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did\
conquer her father\'92s incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.\
\
\'93Well, my dear,\'94 said he, when she ceased speaking, \'93I have no more to\
say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with\
you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.\'94\
\
To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy\
had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.\
\
\'93This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing;\
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow\'92s debts, and got him\
his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble\
and economy. Had it been your uncle\'92s doing, I must and _would_ have\
paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own\
way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about\
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.\'94\
\
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading\
Mr. Collins\'92s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her\
at last to go--saying, as she quitted the room, \'93If any young men come\
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.\'94\
\
Elizabeth\'92s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after\
half an hour\'92s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join\
the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for\
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer\
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity\
would come in time.\
\
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her,\
and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary;\
for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to\
utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could\
comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit\
what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a\
lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in\
her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.\
\
\'93Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would\
have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich\
and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages\
you will have! Jane\'92s is nothing to it--nothing at all. I am so\
pleased--so happy. Such a charming man!--so handsome! so tall!--Oh, my\
dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I\
hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing\
that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh,\
Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted.\'94\
\
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and\
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,\
soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room,\
her mother followed her.\
\
\'93My dearest child,\'94 she cried, \'93I can think of nothing else! Ten\
thousand a year, and very likely more! \'91Tis as good as a Lord! And a\
special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But\
my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of,\
that I may have it to-morrow.\'94\
\
This was a sad omen of what her mother\'92s behaviour to the gentleman\
himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain\
possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations\'92\
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow\
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood\
in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to\
him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her\
deference for his opinion.\
\
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get\
acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising\
every hour in his esteem.\
\
\'93I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,\'94 said he. \'93Wickham, perhaps,\
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well\
as Jane\'92s.\'94\
\
\
\
Chapter 60\
\
\
Elizabeth\'92s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.\
Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. \'93How could\
you begin?\'94 said she. \'93I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when\
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first\
place?\'94\
\
\'93I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which\
laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I\
knew that I _had_ begun.\'94\
\
\'93My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour\
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke\
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now be sincere;\
did you admire me for my impertinence?\'94\
\
\'93For the liveliness of your mind, I did.\'94\
\
\'93You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less.\
The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious\
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,\
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused, and\
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really\
amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you\
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and\
in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously\
courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for\
it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly\
reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me--but nobody thinks\
of _that_ when they fall in love.\'94\
\
\'93Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was\
ill at Netherfield?\'94\
\
\'93Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it\
by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are\
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me\
to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may\
be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling\
to come to the point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first\
called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did\
you look as if you did not care about me?\'94\
\
\'93Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.\'94\
\
\'93But I was embarrassed.\'94\
\
\'93And so was I.\'94\
\
\'93You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.\'94\
\
\'93A man who had felt less, might.\'94\
\
\'93How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that\
I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you\
_would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when\
you _would_ have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution of\
thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.\
_Too much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort\
springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the\
subject. This will never do.\'94\
\
\'93You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady\
Catherine\'92s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of\
removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to\
your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour\
to wait for any opening of yours. My aunt\'92s intelligence had given me\
hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing.\'94\
\
\'93Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,\
for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to\
Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?\
or had you intended any more serious consequence?\'94\
\
\'93My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I\
might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to\
myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley,\
and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.\'94\
\
\'93Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to\
befall her?\'94\
\
\'93I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But it\
ought to be done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be\
done directly.\'94\
\
\'93And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and\
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But\
I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.\'94\
\
From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy\
had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner\'92s\
long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would\
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and\
aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as\
follows:\
\
\'93I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,\
for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say the\
truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.\
But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to your\
fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the\
subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you\
cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a\
great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again,\
for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your\
idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I\
am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so\
before, but not one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she\
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that\
he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.\
Yours, etc.\'94\
\
Mr. Darcy\'92s letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and still\
different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply\
to his last.\
\
\'93DEAR SIR,\
\
\'93I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon\
be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can.\
But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give.\
\
\'93Yours sincerely, etc.\'94\
\
Miss Bingley\'92s congratulations to her brother, on his approaching\
marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even\
to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her\
former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was\
affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing\
her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved.\
\
The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information,\
was as sincere as her brother\'92s in sending it. Four sides of paper were\
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of\
being loved by her sister.\
\
Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations\
to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the\
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this\
sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered\
so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew\'92s letter, that\
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till\
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend\
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their\
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she\
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of\
her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even\
listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away\
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all\
meeting frequently at St. James\'92s, with very decent composure. If he did\
shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.\
\
Mrs. Phillips\'92s vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his\
forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in\
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley\'92s good\
humour encouraged, yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be vulgar.\
Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all\
likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield\
him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep\
him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse\
without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising\
from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it\
added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to\
the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing\
to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at\
Pemberley.\
\
\
\
Chapter 61\
\
\
Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got\
rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride\
she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may\
be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the\
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many\
of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,\
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it\
was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity\
in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and\
invariably silly.\
\
Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her\
drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in\
going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.\
\
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near\
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to\
_his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. The darling wish of his\
sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county\
to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source\
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.\
\
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with\
her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally\
known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a\
temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia\'92s example,\
she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less\
ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia\'92s\
society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham\
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of\
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.\
\
Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily\
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet\'92s being quite\
unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but\
she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no\
longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters\'92 beauty and her own,\
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without\
much reluctance.\
\
As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from\
the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that\
Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude\
and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and in spite of every\
thing, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on\
to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received\
from Lydia on her marriage, explained to her that, by his wife at least,\
if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this\
effect:\
\
\'93MY DEAR LIZZY,\
\
\'93I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear\
Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so\
rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us.\
I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not\
think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help.\
Any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year; but however,\
do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.\
\
\'93Yours, etc.\'94\
\
As it happened that Elizabeth had _much_ rather not, she endeavoured in\
her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.\
Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice\
of what might be called economy in her own private expences, she\
frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an\
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in\
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to\
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or\
herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance\
towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the\
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the\
extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap\
situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection for\
her soon sunk into indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and\
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to\
reputation which her marriage had given her.\
\
Though Darcy could never receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for\
Elizabeth\'92s sake, he assisted him further in his profession. Lydia was\
occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself\
in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently\
staid so long, that even Bingley\'92s good humour was overcome, and he\
proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone.\
\
Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy\'92s marriage; but as she\
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she\
dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as\
attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility\
to Elizabeth.\
\
Pemberley was now Georgiana\'92s home; and the attachment of the sisters\
was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each\
other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion\
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with\
an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of\
talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect\
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open\
pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen\
in her way. By Elizabeth\'92s instructions, she began to comprehend that\
a woman may take liberties with her husband which a brother will not\
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.\
\
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;\
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in\
her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him\
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time\
all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth\'92s persuasion,\
he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;\
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her\
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity\
to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait\
on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had\
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the\
visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.\
\
With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.\
Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever\
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing\
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.\
\
\
\
\
\
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen\
\
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***\
\
***** This file should be named 1342-0.txt or 1342-0.zip *****\
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:\
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/4/1342/\
\
Produced by Anonymous Volunteers\
\
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions\
will be renamed.\
\
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no\
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation\
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without\
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,\
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to\
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to\
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project\
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you\
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you\
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the\
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose\
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and\
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do\
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is\
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial\
redistribution.\
\
\
\
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***\
\
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE\
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK\
\
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free\
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work\
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase \'93Project\
Gutenberg\'94), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project\
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at\
http://gutenberg.org/license).\
\
\
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic works\
\
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to\
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property\
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all\
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy\
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.\
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the\
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or\
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.\
\
1.B.  \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 is a registered trademark.  It may only be\
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who\
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few\
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works\
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See\
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement\
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.\
\
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (\'93the Foundation\'94\
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the\
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an\
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are\
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from\
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative\
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg\
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project\
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by\
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of\
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with\
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by\
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project\
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.\
\
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern\
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in\
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check\
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement\
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or\
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project\
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning\
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United\
States.\
\
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:\
\
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate\
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently\
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the\
phrase \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 appears, or with which the phrase \'93Project\
Gutenberg\'94 is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,\
copied or distributed:\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or\
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org\
\
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived\
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is\
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied\
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees\
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work\
with the phrase \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 associated with or appearing on the\
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1\
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the\
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or\
1.E.9.\
\
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted\
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution\
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional\
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked\
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the\
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.\
\
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this\
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.\
\
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this\
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without\
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with\
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm License.\
\
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,\
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any\
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or\
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than\
\'93Plain Vanilla ASCII\'94 or other format used in the official version\
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),\
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a\
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon\
request, of the work in its original \'93Plain Vanilla ASCII\'94 or other\
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.\
\
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,\
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works\
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\
\
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing\
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided\
that\
\
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from\
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method\
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is\
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he\
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the\
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments\
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you\
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax\
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and\
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the\
     address specified in Section 4, \'93Information about donations to\
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.\'94\
\
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies\
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he\
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
     License.  You must require such a user to return or\
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium\
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of\
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.\
\
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any\
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the\
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days\
     of receipt of the work.\
\
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free\
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.\
\
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set\
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from\
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael\
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the\
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.\
\
1.F.\
\
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable\
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread\
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm\
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain\
\'93Defects,\'94 such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or\
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual\
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a\
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by\
your equipment.\
\
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the \'93Right\
of Replacement or Refund\'94 described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all\
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal\
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT\
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE\
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE\
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE\
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR\
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH\
DAMAGE.\
\
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a\
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can\
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a\
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you\
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with\
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with\
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a\
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity\
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to\
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy\
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further\
opportunities to fix the problem.\
\
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth\
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you \'91AS-IS\'92 WITH NO OTHER\
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO\
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.\
\
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied\
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.\
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the\
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be\
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by\
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any\
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.\
\
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the\
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone\
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance\
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,\
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,\
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,\
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do\
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm\
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any\
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.\
\
\
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of\
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers\
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists\
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from\
people in all walks of life.\
\
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the\
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm\'92s\
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will\
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure\
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.\
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation\
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4\
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.\
\
\
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive\
Foundation\
\
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit\
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the\
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal\
Revenue Service.  The Foundation\'92s EIN or federal tax identification\
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at\
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg\
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent\
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state\'92s laws.\
\
The Foundation\'92s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.\
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered\
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at\
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email\
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact\
information can be found at the Foundation\'92s web site and official\
page at http://pglaf.org\
\
For additional contact information:\
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby\
     Chief Executive and Director\
     gbnewby@pglaf.org\
\
\
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg\
Literary Archive Foundation\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide\
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of\
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be\
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest\
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations\
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt\
status with the IRS.\
\
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating\
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United\
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a\
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up\
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations\
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To\
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any\
particular state visit http://pglaf.org\
\
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we\
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition\
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who\
approach us with offers to donate.\
\
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make\
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from\
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.\
\
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation\
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other\
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.\
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate\
\
\
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works.\
\
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm\
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared\
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project\
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.\
\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed\
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.\
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily\
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.\
\
\
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:\
\
     http://www.gutenberg.org\
\
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,\
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary\
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to\
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.\
}