{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Project Gutenberg EBook of Through the Looking-Glass, by\
Charles Dodgson                         AKA Lewis Carroll\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or\
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org\
\
\
Title: Through the Looking-Glass\
\
Author: Charles Dodgson, AKA Lewis Carroll\
\
Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #12]\
Release Date: February, 1991\
Last Updated: October 6, 2016\
\
Language: English\
\
Character set encoding: UTF-8\
\
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS ***\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS\
\
By Lewis Carroll\
\
\
The Millennium Fulcrum Edition 1.7\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER I. Looking-Glass house\
\
One thing was certain, that the WHITE kitten had had nothing to do with\
it:--it was the black kitten\'92s fault entirely. For the white kitten had\
been having its face washed by the old cat for the last quarter of\
an hour (and bearing it pretty well, considering); so you see that it\
COULDN\'92T have had any hand in the mischief.\
\
The way Dinah washed her children\'92s faces was this: first she held the\
poor thing down by its ear with one paw, and then with the other paw she\
rubbed its face all over, the wrong way, beginning at the nose: and\
just now, as I said, she was hard at work on the white kitten, which was\
lying quite still and trying to purr--no doubt feeling that it was all\
meant for its good.\
\
But the black kitten had been finished with earlier in the afternoon,\
and so, while Alice was sitting curled up in a corner of the great\
arm-chair, half talking to herself and half asleep, the kitten had been\
having a grand game of romps with the ball of worsted Alice had been\
trying to wind up, and had been rolling it up and down till it had all\
come undone again; and there it was, spread over the hearth-rug, all\
knots and tangles, with the kitten running after its own tail in the\
middle.\
\
\'91Oh, you wicked little thing!\'92 cried Alice, catching up the kitten, and\
giving it a little kiss to make it understand that it was in disgrace.\
\'91Really, Dinah ought to have taught you better manners! You OUGHT,\
Dinah, you know you ought!\'92 she added, looking reproachfully at the old\
cat, and speaking in as cross a voice as she could manage--and then she\
scrambled back into the arm-chair, taking the kitten and the worsted\
with her, and began winding up the ball again. But she didn\'92t get on\
very fast, as she was talking all the time, sometimes to the kitten, and\
sometimes to herself. Kitty sat very demurely on her knee, pretending to\
watch the progress of the winding, and now and then putting out one\
paw and gently touching the ball, as if it would be glad to help, if it\
might.\
\
\'91Do you know what to-morrow is, Kitty?\'92 Alice began. \'91You\'92d have guessed\
if you\'92d been up in the window with me--only Dinah was making you tidy,\
so you couldn\'92t. I was watching the boys getting in sticks for the\
bonfire--and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty! Only it got so cold, and\
it snowed so, they had to leave off. Never mind, Kitty, we\'92ll go and\
see the bonfire to-morrow.\'92 Here Alice wound two or three turns of the\
worsted round the kitten\'92s neck, just to see how it would look: this led\
to a scramble, in which the ball rolled down upon the floor, and yards\
and yards of it got unwound again.\
\
\'91Do you know, I was so angry, Kitty,\'92 Alice went on as soon as they were\
comfortably settled again, \'91when I saw all the mischief you had been\
doing, I was very nearly opening the window, and putting you out into\
the snow! And you\'92d have deserved it, you little mischievous darling!\
What have you got to say for yourself? Now don\'92t interrupt me!\'92 she\
went on, holding up one finger. \'91I\'92m going to tell you all your faults.\
Number one: you squeaked twice while Dinah was washing your face this\
morning. Now you can\'92t deny it, Kitty: I heard you! What\'92s that you\
say?\'92 (pretending that the kitten was speaking.) \'91Her paw went into your\
eye? Well, that\'92s YOUR fault, for keeping your eyes open--if you\'92d\
shut them tight up, it wouldn\'92t have happened. Now don\'92t make any more\
excuses, but listen! Number two: you pulled Snowdrop away by the tail\
just as I had put down the saucer of milk before her! What, you were\
thirsty, were you? How do you know she wasn\'92t thirsty too? Now for\
number three: you unwound every bit of the worsted while I wasn\'92t\
looking!\
\
\'91That\'92s three faults, Kitty, and you\'92ve not been punished for any of\
them yet. You know I\'92m saving up all your punishments for Wednesday\
week--Suppose they had saved up all MY punishments!\'92 she went on,\
talking more to herself than the kitten. \'91What WOULD they do at the end\
of a year? I should be sent to prison, I suppose, when the day came.\
Or--let me see--suppose each punishment was to be going without a\
dinner: then, when the miserable day came, I should have to go without\
fifty dinners at once! Well, I shouldn\'92t mind THAT much! I\'92d far rather\
go without them than eat them!\
\
\'91Do you hear the snow against the window-panes, Kitty? How nice and soft\
it sounds! Just as if some one was kissing the window all over outside.\
I wonder if the snow LOVES the trees and fields, that it kisses them so\
gently? And then it covers them up snug, you know, with a white quilt;\
and perhaps it says, \'93Go to sleep, darlings, till the summer comes\
again.\'94 And when they wake up in the summer, Kitty, they dress\
themselves all in green, and dance about--whenever the wind blows--oh,\
that\'92s very pretty!\'92 cried Alice, dropping the ball of worsted to clap\
her hands. \'91And I do so WISH it was true! I\'92m sure the woods look sleepy\
in the autumn, when the leaves are getting brown.\
\
\'91Kitty, can you play chess? Now, don\'92t smile, my dear, I\'92m asking it\
seriously. Because, when we were playing just now, you watched just as\
if you understood it: and when I said \'93Check!\'94 you purred! Well, it WAS\
a nice check, Kitty, and really I might have won, if it hadn\'92t been for\
that nasty Knight, that came wiggling down among my pieces. Kitty, dear,\
let\'92s pretend--\'92 And here I wish I could tell you half the things Alice\
used to say, beginning with her favourite phrase \'91Let\'92s pretend.\'92 She\
had had quite a long argument with her sister only the day before--all\
because Alice had begun with \'91Let\'92s pretend we\'92re kings and queens;\'92 and\
her sister, who liked being very exact, had argued that they couldn\'92t,\
because there were only two of them, and Alice had been reduced at last\
to say, \'91Well, YOU can be one of them then, and I\'92LL be all the rest.\'92\
And once she had really frightened her old nurse by shouting suddenly in\
her ear, \'91Nurse! Do let\'92s pretend that I\'92m a hungry hyaena, and you\'92re a\
bone.\'92\
\
But this is taking us away from Alice\'92s speech to the kitten. \'91Let\'92s\
pretend that you\'92re the Red Queen, Kitty! Do you know, I think if you\
sat up and folded your arms, you\'92d look exactly like her. Now do try,\
there\'92s a dear!\'92 And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and set it\
up before the kitten as a model for it to imitate: however, the thing\
didn\'92t succeed, principally, Alice said, because the kitten wouldn\'92t\
fold its arms properly. So, to punish it, she held it up to the\
Looking-glass, that it might see how sulky it was--\'91and if you\'92re not\
good directly,\'92 she added, \'91I\'92ll put you through into Looking-glass\
House. How would you like THAT?\'92\
\
\'91Now, if you\'92ll only attend, Kitty, and not talk so much, I\'92ll tell you\
all my ideas about Looking-glass House. First, there\'92s the room you can\
see through the glass--that\'92s just the same as our drawing room, only\
the things go the other way. I can see all of it when I get upon a\
chair--all but the bit behind the fireplace. Oh! I do so wish I could\
see THAT bit! I want so much to know whether they\'92ve a fire in the\
winter: you never CAN tell, you know, unless our fire smokes, and then\
smoke comes up in that room too--but that may be only pretence, just to\
make it look as if they had a fire. Well then, the books are something\
like our books, only the words go the wrong way; I know that, because\
I\'92ve held up one of our books to the glass, and then they hold up one in\
the other room.\
\
\'91How would you like to live in Looking-glass House, Kitty? I wonder if\
they\'92d give you milk in there? Perhaps Looking-glass milk isn\'92t good\
to drink--But oh, Kitty! now we come to the passage. You can just see a\
little PEEP of the passage in Looking-glass House, if you leave the door\
of our drawing-room wide open: and it\'92s very like our passage as far\
as you can see, only you know it may be quite different on beyond.\
Oh, Kitty! how nice it would be if we could only get through into\
Looking-glass House! I\'92m sure it\'92s got, oh! such beautiful things in it!\
Let\'92s pretend there\'92s a way of getting through into it, somehow, Kitty.\
Let\'92s pretend the glass has got all soft like gauze, so that we can get\
through. Why, it\'92s turning into a sort of mist now, I declare! It\'92ll be\
easy enough to get through--\'92 She was up on the chimney-piece while she\
said this, though she hardly knew how she had got there. And certainly\
the glass WAS beginning to melt away, just like a bright silvery mist.\
\
In another moment Alice was through the glass, and had jumped lightly\
down into the Looking-glass room. The very first thing she did was\
to look whether there was a fire in the fireplace, and she was quite\
pleased to find that there was a real one, blazing away as brightly as\
the one she had left behind. \'91So I shall be as warm here as I was in the\
old room,\'92 thought Alice: \'91warmer, in fact, because there\'92ll be no one\
here to scold me away from the fire. Oh, what fun it\'92ll be, when they\
see me through the glass in here, and can\'92t get at me!\'92\
\
Then she began looking about, and noticed that what could be seen from\
the old room was quite common and uninteresting, but that all the rest\
was as different as possible. For instance, the pictures on the\
wall next the fire seemed to be all alive, and the very clock on\
the chimney-piece (you know you can only see the back of it in the\
Looking-glass) had got the face of a little old man, and grinned at her.\
\
\'91They don\'92t keep this room so tidy as the other,\'92 Alice thought to\
herself, as she noticed several of the chessmen down in the hearth among\
the cinders: but in another moment, with a little \'91Oh!\'92 of surprise, she\
was down on her hands and knees watching them. The chessmen were walking\
about, two and two!\
\
\'91Here are the Red King and the Red Queen,\'92 Alice said (in a whisper, for\
fear of frightening them), \'91and there are the White King and the White\
Queen sitting on the edge of the shovel--and here are two castles\
walking arm in arm--I don\'92t think they can hear me,\'92 she went on, as she\
put her head closer down, \'91and I\'92m nearly sure they can\'92t see me. I feel\
somehow as if I were invisible--\'92\
\
Here something began squeaking on the table behind Alice, and made her\
turn her head just in time to see one of the White Pawns roll over and\
begin kicking: she watched it with great curiosity to see what would\
happen next.\
\
\'91It is the voice of my child!\'92 the White Queen cried out as she rushed\
past the King, so violently that she knocked him over among the cinders.\
\'91My precious Lily! My imperial kitten!\'92 and she began scrambling wildly\
up the side of the fender.\
\
\'91Imperial fiddlestick!\'92 said the King, rubbing his nose, which had been\
hurt by the fall. He had a right to be a LITTLE annoyed with the Queen,\
for he was covered with ashes from head to foot.\
\
Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as the poor little Lily was\
nearly screaming herself into a fit, she hastily picked up the Queen and\
set her on the table by the side of her noisy little daughter.\
\
The Queen gasped, and sat down: the rapid journey through the air had\
quite taken away her breath and for a minute or two she could do nothing\
but hug the little Lily in silence. As soon as she had recovered her\
breath a little, she called out to the White King, who was sitting\
sulkily among the ashes, \'91Mind the volcano!\'92\
\
\'91What volcano?\'92 said the King, looking up anxiously into the fire, as if\
he thought that was the most likely place to find one.\
\
\'91Blew--me--up,\'92 panted the Queen, who was still a little out of breath.\
\'91Mind you come up--the regular way--don\'92t get blown up!\'92\
\
Alice watched the White King as he slowly struggled up from bar to bar,\
till at last she said, \'91Why, you\'92ll be hours and hours getting to the\
table, at that rate. I\'92d far better help you, hadn\'92t I?\'92 But the King\
took no notice of the question: it was quite clear that he could neither\
hear her nor see her.\
\
So Alice picked him up very gently, and lifted him across more slowly\
than she had lifted the Queen, that she mightn\'92t take his breath away:\
but, before she put him on the table, she thought she might as well dust\
him a little, he was so covered with ashes.\
\
She said afterwards that she had never seen in all her life such a face\
as the King made, when he found himself held in the air by an invisible\
hand, and being dusted: he was far too much astonished to cry out, but\
his eyes and his mouth went on getting larger and larger, and rounder\
and rounder, till her hand shook so with laughing that she nearly let\
him drop upon the floor.\
\
\'91Oh! PLEASE don\'92t make such faces, my dear!\'92 she cried out, quite\
forgetting that the King couldn\'92t hear her. \'91You make me laugh so that\
I can hardly hold you! And don\'92t keep your mouth so wide open! All the\
ashes will get into it--there, now I think you\'92re tidy enough!\'92 she\
added, as she smoothed his hair, and set him upon the table near the\
Queen.\
\
The King immediately fell flat on his back, and lay perfectly still: and\
Alice was a little alarmed at what she had done, and went round the room\
to see if she could find any water to throw over him. However, she could\
find nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got back with it she\
found he had recovered, and he and the Queen were talking together in a\
frightened whisper--so low, that Alice could hardly hear what they said.\
\
The King was saying, \'91I assure, you my dear, I turned cold to the very\
ends of my whiskers!\'92\
\
To which the Queen replied, \'91You haven\'92t got any whiskers.\'92\
\
\'91The horror of that moment,\'92 the King went on, \'91I shall never, NEVER\
forget!\'92\
\
\'91You will, though,\'92 the Queen said, \'91if you don\'92t make a memorandum of\
it.\'92\
\
Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an enormous\
memorandum-book out of his pocket, and began writing. A sudden thought\
struck her, and she took hold of the end of the pencil, which came some\
way over his shoulder, and began writing for him.\
\
The poor King looked puzzled and unhappy, and struggled with the pencil\
for some time without saying anything; but Alice was too strong for him,\
and at last he panted out, \'91My dear! I really MUST get a thinner pencil.\
I can\'92t manage this one a bit; it writes all manner of things that I\
don\'92t intend--\'92\
\
\'91What manner of things?\'92 said the Queen, looking over the book (in which\
Alice had put \'91THE WHITE KNIGHT IS SLIDING DOWN THE POKER. HE BALANCES\
VERY BADLY\'92) \'91That\'92s not a memorandum of YOUR feelings!\'92\
\
There was a book lying near Alice on the table, and while she sat\
watching the White King (for she was still a little anxious about him,\
and had the ink all ready to throw over him, in case he fainted again),\
she turned over the leaves, to find some part that she could read,\
\'91--for it\'92s all in some language I don\'92t know,\'92 she said to herself.\
\
It was like this.\
\
\
             YKCOWREBBAJ\
\
     sevot yhtils eht dna,gillirb sawT\'92\
      ebaw eht ni elbmig dna eryg diD\
        ,sevogorob eht erew ysmim llA\
       .ebargtuo shtar emom eht dnA\
\
\
She puzzled over this for some time, but at last a bright thought struck\
her. \'91Why, it\'92s a Looking-glass book, of course! And if I hold it up to\
a glass, the words will all go the right way again.\'92\
\
This was the poem that Alice read.\
\
\
             JABBERWOCKY\
\
     \'91Twas brillig, and the slithy toves\
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;\
     All mimsy were the borogoves,\
      And the mome raths outgrabe.\
\
     \'91Beware the Jabberwock, my son!\
      The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!\
     Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun\
      The frumious Bandersnatch!\'92\
\
     He took his vorpal sword in hand:\
      Long time the manxome foe he sought--\
     So rested he by the Tumtum tree,\
      And stood awhile in thought.\
\
     And as in uffish thought he stood,\
      The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,\
     Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,\
      And burbled as it came!\
\
     One, two! One, two! And through and through\
      The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!\
     He left it dead, and with its head\
      He went galumphing back.\
\
     \'91And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?\
      Come to my arms, my beamish boy!\
     O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!\'92\
      He chortled in his joy.\
\
     \'91Twas brillig, and the slithy toves\
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;\
     All mimsy were the borogoves,\
      And the mome raths outgrabe.\
\
\
\'91It seems very pretty,\'92 she said when she had finished it, \'91but it\'92s\
RATHER hard to understand!\'92 (You see she didn\'92t like to confess, even\
to herself, that she couldn\'92t make it out at all.) \'91Somehow it seems\
to fill my head with ideas--only I don\'92t exactly know what they are!\
However, SOMEBODY killed SOMETHING: that\'92s clear, at any rate--\'92\
\
\'91But oh!\'92 thought Alice, suddenly jumping up, \'91if I don\'92t make haste I\
shall have to go back through the Looking-glass, before I\'92ve seen what\
the rest of the house is like! Let\'92s have a look at the garden first!\'92\
She was out of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs--or, at least,\
it wasn\'92t exactly running, but a new invention of hers for getting down\
stairs quickly and easily, as Alice said to herself. She just kept the\
tips of her fingers on the hand-rail, and floated gently down without\
even touching the stairs with her feet; then she floated on through the\
hall, and would have gone straight out at the door in the same way, if\
she hadn\'92t caught hold of the door-post. She was getting a little giddy\
with so much floating in the air, and was rather glad to find herself\
walking again in the natural way.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER II. The Garden of Live Flowers\
\
\'91I should see the garden far better,\'92 said Alice to herself, \'91if I could\
get to the top of that hill: and here\'92s a path that leads straight to\
it--at least, no, it doesn\'92t do that--\'92 (after going a few yards along\
the path, and turning several sharp corners), \'91but I suppose it will\
at last. But how curiously it twists! It\'92s more like a corkscrew than a\
path! Well, THIS turn goes to the hill, I suppose--no, it doesn\'92t! This\
goes straight back to the house! Well then, I\'92ll try it the other way.\'92\
\
And so she did: wandering up and down, and trying turn after turn, but\
always coming back to the house, do what she would. Indeed, once, when\
she turned a corner rather more quickly than usual, she ran against it\
before she could stop herself.\
\
\'91It\'92s no use talking about it,\'92 Alice said, looking up at the house and\
pretending it was arguing with her. \'91I\'92m NOT going in again yet. I know\
I should have to get through the Looking-glass again--back into the old\
room--and there\'92d be an end of all my adventures!\'92\
\
So, resolutely turning her back upon the house, she set out once more\
down the path, determined to keep straight on till she got to the hill.\
For a few minutes all went on well, and she was just saying, \'91I really\
SHALL do it this time--\'92 when the path gave a sudden twist and shook\
itself (as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she found\
herself actually walking in at the door.\
\
\'91Oh, it\'92s too bad!\'92 she cried. \'91I never saw such a house for getting in\
the way! Never!\'92\
\
However, there was the hill full in sight, so there was nothing to be\
done but start again. This time she came upon a large flower-bed, with a\
border of daisies, and a willow-tree growing in the middle.\
\
\'91O Tiger-lily,\'92 said Alice, addressing herself to one that was waving\
gracefully about in the wind, \'91I WISH you could talk!\'92\
\
\'91We CAN talk,\'92 said the Tiger-lily: \'91when there\'92s anybody worth talking\
to.\'92\
\
Alice was so astonished that she could not speak for a minute: it quite\
seemed to take her breath away. At length, as the Tiger-lily only went\
on waving about, she spoke again, in a timid voice--almost in a whisper.\
\'91And can ALL the flowers talk?\'92\
\
\'91As well as YOU can,\'92 said the Tiger-lily. \'91And a great deal louder.\'92\
\
\'91It isn\'92t manners for us to begin, you know,\'92 said the Rose, \'91and I\
really was wondering when you\'92d speak! Said I to myself, \'93Her face has\
got SOME sense in it, though it\'92s not a clever one!\'94 Still, you\'92re the\
right colour, and that goes a long way.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t care about the colour,\'92 the Tiger-lily remarked. \'91If only her\
petals curled up a little more, she\'92d be all right.\'92\
\
Alice didn\'92t like being criticised, so she began asking questions.\
\'91Aren\'92t you sometimes frightened at being planted out here, with nobody\
to take care of you?\'92\
\
\'91There\'92s the tree in the middle,\'92 said the Rose: \'91what else is it good\
for?\'92\
\
\'91But what could it do, if any danger came?\'92 Alice asked.\
\
\'91It says \'93Bough-wough!\'94\'92 cried a Daisy: \'91that\'92s why its branches are\
called boughs!\'92\
\
\'91Didn\'92t you know THAT?\'92 cried another Daisy, and here they all began\
shouting together, till the air seemed quite full of little shrill\
voices. \'91Silence, every one of you!\'92 cried the Tiger-lily, waving itself\
passionately from side to side, and trembling with excitement. \'91They\
know I can\'92t get at them!\'92 it panted, bending its quivering head towards\
Alice, \'91or they wouldn\'92t dare to do it!\'92\
\
\'91Never mind!\'92 Alice said in a soothing tone, and stooping down to the\
daisies, who were just beginning again, she whispered, \'91If you don\'92t\
hold your tongues, I\'92ll pick you!\'92\
\
There was silence in a moment, and several of the pink daisies turned\
white.\
\
\'91That\'92s right!\'92 said the Tiger-lily. \'91The daisies are worst of all. When\
one speaks, they all begin together, and it\'92s enough to make one wither\
to hear the way they go on!\'92\
\
\'91How is it you can all talk so nicely?\'92 Alice said, hoping to get it\
into a better temper by a compliment. \'91I\'92ve been in many gardens before,\
but none of the flowers could talk.\'92\
\
\'91Put your hand down, and feel the ground,\'92 said the Tiger-lily. \'91Then\
you\'92ll know why.\'92\
\
Alice did so. \'91It\'92s very hard,\'92 she said, \'91but I don\'92t see what that has\
to do with it.\'92\
\
\'91In most gardens,\'92 the Tiger-lily said, \'91they make the beds too soft--so\
that the flowers are always asleep.\'92\
\
This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite pleased to know it.\
\'91I never thought of that before!\'92 she said.\
\
\'91It\'92s MY opinion that you never think AT ALL,\'92 the Rose said in a rather\
severe tone.\
\
\'91I never saw anybody that looked stupider,\'92 a Violet said, so suddenly,\
that Alice quite jumped; for it hadn\'92t spoken before.\
\
\'91Hold YOUR tongue!\'92 cried the Tiger-lily. \'91As if YOU ever saw anybody!\
You keep your head under the leaves, and snore away there, till you know\
no more what\'92s going on in the world, than if you were a bud!\'92\
\
\'91Are there any more people in the garden besides me?\'92 Alice said, not\
choosing to notice the Rose\'92s last remark.\
\
\'91There\'92s one other flower in the garden that can move about like you,\'92\
said the Rose. \'91I wonder how you do it--\'92 (\'91You\'92re always wondering,\'92\
said the Tiger-lily), \'91but she\'92s more bushy than you are.\'92\
\
\'91Is she like me?\'92 Alice asked eagerly, for the thought crossed her mind,\
\'91There\'92s another little girl in the garden, somewhere!\'92\
\
\'91Well, she has the same awkward shape as you,\'92 the Rose said, \'91but she\'92s\
redder--and her petals are shorter, I think.\'92\
\
\'91Her petals are done up close, almost like a dahlia,\'92 the Tiger-lily\
interrupted: \'91not tumbled about anyhow, like yours.\'92\
\
\'91But that\'92s not YOUR fault,\'92 the Rose added kindly: \'91you\'92re beginning\
to fade, you know--and then one can\'92t help one\'92s petals getting a little\
untidy.\'92\
\
Alice didn\'92t like this idea at all: so, to change the subject, she asked\
\'91Does she ever come out here?\'92\
\
\'91I daresay you\'92ll see her soon,\'92 said the Rose. \'91She\'92s one of the thorny\
kind.\'92\
\
\'91Where does she wear the thorns?\'92 Alice asked with some curiosity.\
\
\'91Why all round her head, of course,\'92 the Rose replied. \'91I was wondering\
YOU hadn\'92t got some too. I thought it was the regular rule.\'92\
\
\'91She\'92s coming!\'92 cried the Larkspur. \'91I hear her footstep, thump, thump,\
thump, along the gravel-walk!\'92\
\
Alice looked round eagerly, and found that it was the Red Queen. \'91She\'92s\
grown a good deal!\'92 was her first remark. She had indeed: when Alice\
first found her in the ashes, she had been only three inches high--and\
here she was, half a head taller than Alice herself!\
\
\'91It\'92s the fresh air that does it,\'92 said the Rose: \'91wonderfully fine air\
it is, out here.\'92\
\
\'91I think I\'92ll go and meet her,\'92 said Alice, for, though the flowers were\
interesting enough, she felt that it would be far grander to have a talk\
with a real Queen.\
\
\'91You can\'92t possibly do that,\'92 said the Rose: \'91_I_ should advise you to\
walk the other way.\'92\
\
This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said nothing, but set off at\
once towards the Red Queen. To her surprise, she lost sight of her in a\
moment, and found herself walking in at the front-door again.\
\
A little provoked, she drew back, and after looking everywhere for the\
queen (whom she spied out at last, a long way off), she thought she\
would try the plan, this time, of walking in the opposite direction.\
\
It succeeded beautifully. She had not been walking a minute before she\
found herself face to face with the Red Queen, and full in sight of the\
hill she had been so long aiming at.\
\
\'91Where do you come from?\'92 said the Red Queen. \'91And where are you going?\
Look up, speak nicely, and don\'92t twiddle your fingers all the time.\'92\
\
Alice attended to all these directions, and explained, as well as she\
could, that she had lost her way.\
\
\'91I don\'92t know what you mean by YOUR way,\'92 said the Queen: \'91all the ways\
about here belong to ME--but why did you come out here at all?\'92 she\
added in a kinder tone. \'91Curtsey while you\'92re thinking what to say, it\
saves time.\'92\
\
Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too much in awe of the\
Queen to disbelieve it. \'91I\'92ll try it when I go home,\'92 she thought to\
herself, \'91the next time I\'92m a little late for dinner.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s time for you to answer now,\'92 the Queen said, looking at her watch:\
\'91open your mouth a LITTLE wider when you speak, and always say \'93your\
Majesty.\'94\'92\
\
\'91I only wanted to see what the garden was like, your Majesty--\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s right,\'92 said the Queen, patting her on the head, which Alice\
didn\'92t like at all, \'91though, when you say \'93garden,\'94--I\'92VE seen gardens,\
compared with which this would be a wilderness.\'92\
\
Alice didn\'92t dare to argue the point, but went on: \'91--and I thought I\'92d\
try and find my way to the top of that hill--\'92\
\
\'91When you say \'93hill,\'94\'92 the Queen interrupted, \'91_I_ could show you hills,\
in comparison with which you\'92d call that a valley.\'92\
\
\'91No, I shouldn\'92t,\'92 said Alice, surprised into contradicting her at last:\
\'91a hill CAN\'92T be a valley, you know. That would be nonsense--\'92\
\
The Red Queen shook her head, \'91You may call it \'93nonsense\'94 if you like,\'92\
she said, \'91but I\'92VE heard nonsense, compared with which that would be as\
sensible as a dictionary!\'92\
\
Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from the Queen\'92s tone that she\
was a LITTLE offended: and they walked on in silence till they got to\
the top of the little hill.\
\
For some minutes Alice stood without speaking, looking out in all\
directions over the country--and a most curious country it was. There\
were a number of tiny little brooks running straight across it from side\
to side, and the ground between was divided up into squares by a number\
of little green hedges, that reached from brook to brook.\
\
\'91I declare it\'92s marked out just like a large chessboard!\'92 Alice said at\
last. \'91There ought to be some men moving about somewhere--and so there\
are!\'92 She added in a tone of delight, and her heart began to beat quick\
with excitement as she went on. \'91It\'92s a great huge game of chess that\'92s\
being played--all over the world--if this IS the world at all, you know.\
Oh, what fun it is! How I WISH I was one of them! I wouldn\'92t mind being\
a Pawn, if only I might join--though of course I should LIKE to be a\
Queen, best.\'92\
\
She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen as she said this, but her\
companion only smiled pleasantly, and said, \'91That\'92s easily managed. You\
can be the White Queen\'92s Pawn, if you like, as Lily\'92s too young to\
play; and you\'92re in the Second Square to begin with: when you get to\
the Eighth Square you\'92ll be a Queen--\'92 Just at this moment, somehow or\
other, they began to run.\
\
Alice never could quite make out, in thinking it over afterwards, how it\
was that they began: all she remembers is, that they were running hand\
in hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could do to keep\
up with her: and still the Queen kept crying \'91Faster! Faster!\'92 but Alice\
felt she COULD NOT go faster, though she had not breath left to say so.\
\
The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees and the other\
things round them never changed their places at all: however fast they\
went, they never seemed to pass anything. \'91I wonder if all the things\
move along with us?\'92 thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen seemed to\
guess her thoughts, for she cried, \'91Faster! Don\'92t try to talk!\'92\
\
Not that Alice had any idea of doing THAT. She felt as if she would\
never be able to talk again, she was getting so much out of breath: and\
still the Queen cried \'91Faster! Faster!\'92 and dragged her along. \'91Are we\
nearly there?\'92 Alice managed to pant out at last.\
\
\'91Nearly there!\'92 the Queen repeated. \'91Why, we passed it ten minutes ago!\
Faster!\'92 And they ran on for a time in silence, with the wind whistling\
in Alice\'92s ears, and almost blowing her hair off her head, she fancied.\
\
\'91Now! Now!\'92 cried the Queen. \'91Faster! Faster!\'92 And they went so fast\
that at last they seemed to skim through the air, hardly touching the\
ground with their feet, till suddenly, just as Alice was getting quite\
exhausted, they stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground,\
breathless and giddy.\
\
The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said kindly, \'91You may rest\
a little now.\'92\
\
Alice looked round her in great surprise. \'91Why, I do believe we\'92ve been\
under this tree the whole time! Everything\'92s just as it was!\'92\
\
\'91Of course it is,\'92 said the Queen, \'91what would you have it?\'92\
\
\'91Well, in OUR country,\'92 said Alice, still panting a little, \'91you\'92d\
generally get to somewhere else--if you ran very fast for a long time,\
as we\'92ve been doing.\'92\
\
\'91A slow sort of country!\'92 said the Queen. \'91Now, HERE, you see, it takes\
all the running YOU can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to\
get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!\'92\
\
\'91I\'92d rather not try, please!\'92 said Alice. \'91I\'92m quite content to stay\
here--only I AM so hot and thirsty!\'92\
\
\'91I know what YOU\'92D like!\'92 the Queen said good-naturedly, taking a little\
box out of her pocket. \'91Have a biscuit?\'92\
\
Alice thought it would not be civil to say \'91No,\'92 though it wasn\'92t at all\
what she wanted. So she took it, and ate it as well as she could: and it\
was VERY dry; and she thought she had never been so nearly choked in all\
her life.\
\
\'91While you\'92re refreshing yourself,\'92 said the Queen, \'91I\'92ll just take\
the measurements.\'92 And she took a ribbon out of her pocket, marked in\
inches, and began measuring the ground, and sticking little pegs in here\
and there.\
\
\'91At the end of two yards,\'92 she said, putting in a peg to mark the\
distance, \'91I shall give you your directions--have another biscuit?\'92\
\
\'91No, thank you,\'92 said Alice: \'91one\'92s QUITE enough!\'92\
\
\'91Thirst quenched, I hope?\'92 said the Queen.\
\
Alice did not know what to say to this, but luckily the Queen did not\
wait for an answer, but went on. \'91At the end of THREE yards I shall\
repeat them--for fear of your forgetting them. At the end of FOUR, I\
shall say good-bye. And at the end of FIVE, I shall go!\'92\
\
She had got all the pegs put in by this time, and Alice looked on\
with great interest as she returned to the tree, and then began slowly\
walking down the row.\
\
At the two-yard peg she faced round, and said, \'91A pawn goes two squares\
in its first move, you know. So you\'92ll go VERY quickly through the Third\
Square--by railway, I should think--and you\'92ll find yourself in the\
Fourth Square in no time. Well, THAT square belongs to Tweedledum and\
Tweedledee--the Fifth is mostly water--the Sixth belongs to Humpty\
Dumpty--But you make no remark?\'92\
\
\'91I--I didn\'92t know I had to make one--just then,\'92 Alice faltered out.\
\
\'91You SHOULD have said, \'93It\'92s extremely kind of you to tell me all\
this\'94--however, we\'92ll suppose it said--the Seventh Square is all\
forest--however, one of the Knights will show you the way--and in the\
Eighth Square we shall be Queens together, and it\'92s all feasting and\
fun!\'92 Alice got up and curtseyed, and sat down again.\
\
At the next peg the Queen turned again, and this time she said, \'91Speak\
in French when you can\'92t think of the English for a thing--turn out your\
toes as you walk--and remember who you are!\'92 She did not wait for Alice\
to curtsey this time, but walked on quickly to the next peg, where she\
turned for a moment to say \'91good-bye,\'92 and then hurried on to the last.\
\
How it happened, Alice never knew, but exactly as she came to the last\
peg, she was gone. Whether she vanished into the air, or whether she\
ran quickly into the wood (\'91and she CAN run very fast!\'92 thought Alice),\
there was no way of guessing, but she was gone, and Alice began to\
remember that she was a Pawn, and that it would soon be time for her to\
move.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER III. Looking-Glass Insects\
\
Of course the first thing to do was to make a grand survey of the\
country she was going to travel through. \'91It\'92s something very like\
learning geography,\'92 thought Alice, as she stood on tiptoe in hopes of\
being able to see a little further. \'91Principal rivers--there ARE none.\
Principal mountains--I\'92m on the only one, but I don\'92t think it\'92s got any\
name. Principal towns--why, what ARE those creatures, making honey down\
there? They can\'92t be bees--nobody ever saw bees a mile off, you know--\'92\
and for some time she stood silent, watching one of them that was\
bustling about among the flowers, poking its proboscis into them, \'91just\
as if it was a regular bee,\'92 thought Alice.\
\
However, this was anything but a regular bee: in fact it was an\
elephant--as Alice soon found out, though the idea quite took her breath\
away at first. \'91And what enormous flowers they must be!\'92 was her next\
idea. \'91Something like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks put\
to them--and what quantities of honey they must make! I think I\'92ll go\
down and--no, I won\'92t JUST yet,\'92 she went on, checking herself just as\
she was beginning to run down the hill, and trying to find some excuse\
for turning shy so suddenly. \'91It\'92ll never do to go down among them\
without a good long branch to brush them away--and what fun it\'92ll be\
when they ask me how I like my walk. I shall say--\'93Oh, I like it well\
enough--\'93\'92 (here came the favourite little toss of the head), \'91\'93only it\
was so dusty and hot, and the elephants did tease so!\'94\'92\
\
\'91I think I\'92ll go down the other way,\'92 she said after a pause: \'91and\
perhaps I may visit the elephants later on. Besides, I do so want to get\
into the Third Square!\'92\
\
So with this excuse she ran down the hill and jumped over the first of\
the six little brooks.\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
\'91Tickets, please!\'92 said the Guard, putting his head in at the window.\
In a moment everybody was holding out a ticket: they were about the same\
size as the people, and quite seemed to fill the carriage.\
\
\'91Now then! Show your ticket, child!\'92 the Guard went on, looking angrily\
at Alice. And a great many voices all said together (\'91like the chorus of\
a song,\'92 thought Alice), \'91Don\'92t keep him waiting, child! Why, his time\
is worth a thousand pounds a minute!\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid I haven\'92t got one,\'92 Alice said in a frightened tone: \'91there\
wasn\'92t a ticket-office where I came from.\'92 And again the chorus of\
voices went on. \'91There wasn\'92t room for one where she came from. The land\
there is worth a thousand pounds an inch!\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t make excuses,\'92 said the Guard: \'91you should have bought one from\
the engine-driver.\'92 And once more the chorus of voices went on with \'91The\
man that drives the engine. Why, the smoke alone is worth a thousand\
pounds a puff!\'92\
\
Alice thought to herself, \'91Then there\'92s no use in speaking.\'92 The\
voices didn\'92t join in this time, as she hadn\'92t spoken, but to her\
great surprise, they all THOUGHT in chorus (I hope you understand what\
THINKING IN CHORUS means--for I must confess that _I_ don\'92t), \'91Better\
say nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand pounds a word!\'92\
\
\'91I shall dream about a thousand pounds tonight, I know I shall!\'92 thought\
Alice.\
\
All this time the Guard was looking at her, first through a telescope,\
then through a microscope, and then through an opera-glass. At last he\
said, \'91You\'92re travelling the wrong way,\'92 and shut up the window and went\
away.\
\
\'91So young a child,\'92 said the gentleman sitting opposite to her (he was\
dressed in white paper), \'91ought to know which way she\'92s going, even if\
she doesn\'92t know her own name!\'92\
\
A Goat, that was sitting next to the gentleman in white, shut his\
eyes and said in a loud voice, \'91She ought to know her way to the\
ticket-office, even if she doesn\'92t know her alphabet!\'92\
\
There was a Beetle sitting next to the Goat (it was a very queer\
carriage-full of passengers altogether), and, as the rule seemed to be\
that they should all speak in turn, HE went on with \'91She\'92ll have to go\
back from here as luggage!\'92\
\
Alice couldn\'92t see who was sitting beyond the Beetle, but a hoarse voice\
spoke next. \'91Change engines--\'92 it said, and was obliged to leave off.\
\
\'91It sounds like a horse,\'92 Alice thought to herself. And an extremely\
small voice, close to her ear, said, \'91You might make a joke on\
that--something about \'93horse\'94 and \'93hoarse,\'94 you know.\'92\
\
Then a very gentle voice in the distance said, \'91She must be labelled\
\'93Lass, with care,\'94 you know--\'92\
\
And after that other voices went on (\'91What a number of people there are\
in the carriage!\'92 thought Alice), saying, \'91She must go by post, as she\'92s\
got a head on her--\'92 \'91She must be sent as a message by the telegraph--\'92\
\'91She must draw the train herself the rest of the way--\'92 and so on.\
\
But the gentleman dressed in white paper leaned forwards and whispered\
in her ear, \'91Never mind what they all say, my dear, but take a\
return-ticket every time the train stops.\'92\
\
\'91Indeed I shan\'92t!\'92 Alice said rather impatiently. \'91I don\'92t belong to\
this railway journey at all--I was in a wood just now--and I wish I\
could get back there.\'92\
\
\'91You might make a joke on THAT,\'92 said the little voice close to her ear:\
\'91something about \'93you WOULD if you could,\'94 you know.\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t tease so,\'92 said Alice, looking about in vain to see where the\
voice came from; \'91if you\'92re so anxious to have a joke made, why don\'92t\
you make one yourself?\'92\
\
The little voice sighed deeply: it was VERY unhappy, evidently, and\
Alice would have said something pitying to comfort it, \'91If it would only\
sigh like other people!\'92 she thought. But this was such a wonderfully\
small sigh, that she wouldn\'92t have heard it at all, if it hadn\'92t come\
QUITE close to her ear. The consequence of this was that it tickled her\
ear very much, and quite took off her thoughts from the unhappiness of\
the poor little creature.\
\
\'91I know you are a friend,\'92 the little voice went on; \'91a dear friend, and\
an old friend. And you won\'92t hurt me, though I AM an insect.\'92\
\
\'91What kind of insect?\'92 Alice inquired a little anxiously. What she\
really wanted to know was, whether it could sting or not, but she\
thought this wouldn\'92t be quite a civil question to ask.\
\
\'91What, then you don\'92t--\'92 the little voice began, when it was drowned by\
a shrill scream from the engine, and everybody jumped up in alarm, Alice\
among the rest.\
\
The Horse, who had put his head out of the window, quietly drew it in\
and said, \'91It\'92s only a brook we have to jump over.\'92 Everybody seemed\
satisfied with this, though Alice felt a little nervous at the idea of\
trains jumping at all. \'91However, it\'92ll take us into the Fourth Square,\
that\'92s some comfort!\'92 she said to herself. In another moment she felt\
the carriage rise straight up into the air, and in her fright she caught\
at the thing nearest to her hand, which happened to be the Goat\'92s beard.\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
But the beard seemed to melt away as she touched it, and she found\
herself sitting quietly under a tree--while the Gnat (for that was the\
insect she had been talking to) was balancing itself on a twig just over\
her head, and fanning her with its wings.\
\
It certainly was a VERY large Gnat: \'91about the size of a chicken,\'92 Alice\
thought. Still, she couldn\'92t feel nervous with it, after they had been\
talking together so long.\
\
\'91--then you don\'92t like all insects?\'92 the Gnat went on, as quietly as if\
nothing had happened.\
\
\'91I like them when they can talk,\'92 Alice said. \'91None of them ever talk,\
where _I_ come from.\'92\
\
\'91What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where YOU come from?\'92 the Gnat\
inquired.\
\
\'91I don\'92t REJOICE in insects at all,\'92 Alice explained, \'91because I\'92m\
rather afraid of them--at least the large kinds. But I can tell you the\
names of some of them.\'92\
\
\'91Of course they answer to their names?\'92 the Gnat remarked carelessly.\
\
\'91I never knew them to do it.\'92\
\
\'91What\'92s the use of their having names,\'92 the Gnat said, \'91if they won\'92t\
answer to them?\'92\
\
\'91No use to THEM,\'92 said Alice; \'91but it\'92s useful to the people who name\
them, I suppose. If not, why do things have names at all?\'92\
\
\'91I can\'92t say,\'92 the Gnat replied. \'91Further on, in the wood down there,\
they\'92ve got no names--however, go on with your list of insects: you\'92re\
wasting time.\'92\
\
\'91Well, there\'92s the Horse-fly,\'92 Alice began, counting off the names on\
her fingers.\
\
\'91All right,\'92 said the Gnat: \'91half way up that bush, you\'92ll see a\
Rocking-horse-fly, if you look. It\'92s made entirely of wood, and gets\
about by swinging itself from branch to branch.\'92\
\
\'91What does it live on?\'92 Alice asked, with great curiosity.\
\
\'91Sap and sawdust,\'92 said the Gnat. \'91Go on with the list.\'92\
\
Alice looked up at the Rocking-horse-fly with great interest, and made\
up her mind that it must have been just repainted, it looked so bright\
and sticky; and then she went on.\
\
\'91And there\'92s the Dragon-fly.\'92\
\
\'91Look on the branch above your head,\'92 said the Gnat, \'91and there you\'92ll\
find a snap-dragon-fly. Its body is made of plum-pudding, its wings of\
holly-leaves, and its head is a raisin burning in brandy.\'92\
\
\'91And what does it live on?\'92\
\
\'91Frumenty and mince pie,\'92 the Gnat replied; \'91and it makes its nest in a\
Christmas box.\'92\
\
\'91And then there\'92s the Butterfly,\'92 Alice went on, after she had taken\
a good look at the insect with its head on fire, and had thought to\
herself, \'91I wonder if that\'92s the reason insects are so fond of flying\
into candles--because they want to turn into Snap-dragon-flies!\'92\
\
\'91Crawling at your feet,\'92 said the Gnat (Alice drew her feet back in\
some alarm), \'91you may observe a Bread-and-Butterfly. Its wings are thin\
slices of Bread-and-butter, its body is a crust, and its head is a lump\
of sugar.\'92\
\
\'91And what does IT live on?\'92\
\
\'91Weak tea with cream in it.\'92\
\
A new difficulty came into Alice\'92s head. \'91Supposing it couldn\'92t find\
any?\'92 she suggested.\
\
\'91Then it would die, of course.\'92\
\
\'91But that must happen very often,\'92 Alice remarked thoughtfully.\
\
\'91It always happens,\'92 said the Gnat.\
\
After this, Alice was silent for a minute or two, pondering. The Gnat\
amused itself meanwhile by humming round and round her head: at last\
it settled again and remarked, \'91I suppose you don\'92t want to lose your\
name?\'92\
\
\'91No, indeed,\'92 Alice said, a little anxiously.\
\
\'91And yet I don\'92t know,\'92 the Gnat went on in a careless tone: \'91only think\
how convenient it would be if you could manage to go home without it!\
For instance, if the governess wanted to call you to your lessons, she\
would call out \'93come here--,\'94 and there she would have to leave off,\
because there wouldn\'92t be any name for her to call, and of course you\
wouldn\'92t have to go, you know.\'92\
\
\'91That would never do, I\'92m sure,\'92 said Alice: \'91the governess would never\
think of excusing me lessons for that. If she couldn\'92t remember my name,\
she\'92d call me \'93Miss!\'94 as the servants do.\'92\
\
\'91Well, if she said \'93Miss,\'94 and didn\'92t say anything more,\'92 the Gnat\
remarked, \'91of course you\'92d miss your lessons. That\'92s a joke. I wish YOU\
had made it.\'92\
\
\'91Why do you wish _I_ had made it?\'92 Alice asked. \'91It\'92s a very bad one.\'92\
\
But the Gnat only sighed deeply, while two large tears came rolling down\
its cheeks.\
\
\'91You shouldn\'92t make jokes,\'92 Alice said, \'91if it makes you so unhappy.\'92\
\
Then came another of those melancholy little sighs, and this time the\
poor Gnat really seemed to have sighed itself away, for, when Alice\
looked up, there was nothing whatever to be seen on the twig, and, as\
she was getting quite chilly with sitting still so long, she got up and\
walked on.\
\
She very soon came to an open field, with a wood on the other side of\
it: it looked much darker than the last wood, and Alice felt a LITTLE\
timid about going into it. However, on second thoughts, she made up her\
mind to go on: \'91for I certainly won\'92t go BACK,\'92 she thought to herself,\
and this was the only way to the Eighth Square.\
\
\'91This must be the wood,\'92 she said thoughtfully to herself, \'91where\
things have no names. I wonder what\'92ll become of MY name when I go in?\
I shouldn\'92t like to lose it at all--because they\'92d have to give me\
another, and it would be almost certain to be an ugly one. But then\
the fun would be trying to find the creature that had got my old\
name! That\'92s just like the advertisements, you know, when people lose\
dogs--\'93ANSWERS TO THE NAME OF \'91DASH:\'92 HAD ON A BRASS COLLAR\'94--just fancy\
calling everything you met \'93Alice,\'94 till one of them answered! Only they\
wouldn\'92t answer at all, if they were wise.\'92\
\
She was rambling on in this way when she reached the wood: it looked\
very cool and shady. \'91Well, at any rate it\'92s a great comfort,\'92 she\
said as she stepped under the trees, \'91after being so hot, to get into\
the--into WHAT?\'92 she went on, rather surprised at not being able to\
think of the word. \'91I mean to get under the--under the--under THIS, you\
know!\'92 putting her hand on the trunk of the tree. \'91What DOES it call\
itself, I wonder? I do believe it\'92s got no name--why, to be sure it\
hasn\'92t!\'92\
\
She stood silent for a minute, thinking: then she suddenly began again.\
\'91Then it really HAS happened, after all! And now, who am I? I WILL\
remember, if I can! I\'92m determined to do it!\'92 But being determined\
didn\'92t help much, and all she could say, after a great deal of puzzling,\
was, \'91L, I KNOW it begins with L!\'92\
\
Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it looked at Alice with its large\
gentle eyes, but didn\'92t seem at all frightened. \'91Here then! Here then!\'92\
Alice said, as she held out her hand and tried to stroke it; but it only\
started back a little, and then stood looking at her again.\
\
\'91What do you call yourself?\'92 the Fawn said at last. Such a soft sweet\
voice it had!\
\
\'91I wish I knew!\'92 thought poor Alice. She answered, rather sadly,\
\'91Nothing, just now.\'92\
\
\'91Think again,\'92 it said: \'91that won\'92t do.\'92\
\
Alice thought, but nothing came of it. \'91Please, would you tell me\
what YOU call yourself?\'92 she said timidly. \'91I think that might help a\
little.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92ll tell you, if you\'92ll move a little further on,\'92 the Fawn said. \'91I\
can\'92t remember here.\'92\
\
So they walked on together though the wood, Alice with her arms clasped\
lovingly round the soft neck of the Fawn, till they came out into\
another open field, and here the Fawn gave a sudden bound into the air,\
and shook itself free from Alice\'92s arms. \'91I\'92m a Fawn!\'92 it cried out in a\
voice of delight, \'91and, dear me! you\'92re a human child!\'92 A sudden look of\
alarm came into its beautiful brown eyes, and in another moment it had\
darted away at full speed.\
\
Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to cry with vexation at\
having lost her dear little fellow-traveller so suddenly. \'91However, I\
know my name now.\'92 she said, \'91that\'92s SOME comfort. Alice--Alice--I won\'92t\
forget it again. And now, which of these finger-posts ought I to follow,\
I wonder?\'92\
\
It was not a very difficult question to answer, as there was only one\
road through the wood, and the two finger-posts both pointed along it.\
\'91I\'92ll settle it,\'92 Alice said to herself, \'91when the road divides and they\
point different ways.\'92\
\
But this did not seem likely to happen. She went on and on, a long way,\
but wherever the road divided there were sure to be two finger-posts\
pointing the same way, one marked \'91TO TWEEDLEDUM\'92S HOUSE\'92 and the other\
\'91TO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE.\'92\
\
\'91I do believe,\'92 said Alice at last, \'91that they live in the same house! I\
wonder I never thought of that before--But I can\'92t stay there long. I\'92ll\
just call and say \'93how d\'92you do?\'94 and ask them the way out of the wood.\
If I could only get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark!\'92 So she\
wandered on, talking to herself as she went, till, on turning a sharp\
corner, she came upon two fat little men, so suddenly that she could not\
help starting back, but in another moment she recovered herself, feeling\
sure that they must be.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER IV. Tweedledum And Tweedledee\
\
They were standing under a tree, each with an arm round the other\'92s\
neck, and Alice knew which was which in a moment, because one of them\
had \'91DUM\'92 embroidered on his collar, and the other \'91DEE.\'92 \'91I suppose\
they\'92ve each got \'93TWEEDLE\'94 round at the back of the collar,\'92 she said to\
herself.\
\
They stood so still that she quite forgot they were alive, and she was\
just looking round to see if the word \'93TWEEDLE\'94 was written at the back\
of each collar, when she was startled by a voice coming from the one\
marked \'91DUM.\'92\
\
\'91If you think we\'92re wax-works,\'92 he said, \'91you ought to pay, you know.\
Wax-works weren\'92t made to be looked at for nothing, nohow!\'92\
\
\'91Contrariwise,\'92 added the one marked \'91DEE,\'92 \'91if you think we\'92re alive,\
you ought to speak.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m sure I\'92m very sorry,\'92 was all Alice could say; for the words of the\
old song kept ringing through her head like the ticking of a clock, and\
she could hardly help saying them out loud:--\
\
\
     \'91Tweedledum and Tweedledee\
      Agreed to have a battle;\
     For Tweedledum said Tweedledee\
      Had spoiled his nice new rattle.\
\
     Just then flew down a monstrous crow,\
      As black as a tar-barrel;\
     Which frightened both the heroes so,\
      They quite forgot their quarrel.\'92\
\
\'91I know what you\'92re thinking about,\'92 said Tweedledum: \'91but it isn\'92t so,\
nohow.\'92\
\
\'91Contrariwise,\'92 continued Tweedledee, \'91if it was so, it might be; and if\
it were so, it would be; but as it isn\'92t, it ain\'92t. That\'92s logic.\'92\
\
\'91I was thinking,\'92 Alice said very politely, \'91which is the best way out\
of this wood: it\'92s getting so dark. Would you tell me, please?\'92\
\
But the little men only looked at each other and grinned.\
\
They looked so exactly like a couple of great schoolboys, that Alice\
couldn\'92t help pointing her finger at Tweedledum, and saying \'91First Boy!\'92\
\
\'91Nohow!\'92 Tweedledum cried out briskly, and shut his mouth up again with\
a snap.\
\
\'91Next Boy!\'92 said Alice, passing on to Tweedledee, though she felt quite\
certain he would only shout out \'91Contrariwise!\'92 and so he did.\
\
\'91You\'92ve been wrong!\'92 cried Tweedledum. \'91The first thing in a visit is to\
say \'93How d\'92ye do?\'94 and shake hands!\'92 And here the two brothers gave each\
other a hug, and then they held out the two hands that were free, to\
shake hands with her.\
\
Alice did not like shaking hands with either of them first, for fear\
of hurting the other one\'92s feelings; so, as the best way out of the\
difficulty, she took hold of both hands at once: the next moment they\
were dancing round in a ring. This seemed quite natural (she remembered\
afterwards), and she was not even surprised to hear music playing: it\
seemed to come from the tree under which they were dancing, and it was\
done (as well as she could make it out) by the branches rubbing one\
across the other, like fiddles and fiddle-sticks.\
\
\'91But it certainly WAS funny,\'92 (Alice said afterwards, when she was\
telling her sister the history of all this,) \'91to find myself singing\
\'93HERE WE GO ROUND THE MULBERRY BUSH.\'94 I don\'92t know when I began it, but\
somehow I felt as if I\'92d been singing it a long long time!\'92\
\
The other two dancers were fat, and very soon out of breath. \'91Four times\
round is enough for one dance,\'92 Tweedledum panted out, and they left\
off dancing as suddenly as they had begun: the music stopped at the same\
moment.\
\
Then they let go of Alice\'92s hands, and stood looking at her for a\
minute: there was a rather awkward pause, as Alice didn\'92t know how to\
begin a conversation with people she had just been dancing with. \'91It\
would never do to say \'93How d\'92ye do?\'94 NOW,\'92 she said to herself: \'91we seem\
to have got beyond that, somehow!\'92\
\
\'91I hope you\'92re not much tired?\'92 she said at last.\
\
\'91Nohow. And thank you VERY much for asking,\'92 said Tweedledum.\
\
\'91So much obliged!\'92 added Tweedledee. \'91You like poetry?\'92\
\
\'91Ye-es, pretty well--SOME poetry,\'92 Alice said doubtfully. \'91Would you\
tell me which road leads out of the wood?\'92\
\
\'91What shall I repeat to her?\'92 said Tweedledee, looking round at\
Tweedledum with great solemn eyes, and not noticing Alice\'92s question.\
\
\'91\'93THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER\'94 is the longest,\'92 Tweedledum replied,\
giving his brother an affectionate hug.\
\
Tweedledee began instantly:\
\
       \'91The sun was shining--\'92\
\
Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. \'91If it\'92s VERY long,\'92 she said, as\
politely as she could, \'91would you please tell me first which road--\'92\
\
Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again:\
\
     \'91The sun was shining on the sea,\
      Shining with all his might:\
     He did his very best to make\
      The billows smooth and bright--\
     And this was odd, because it was\
      The middle of the night.\
\
     The moon was shining sulkily,\
      Because she thought the sun\
     Had got no business to be there\
      After the day was done--\
     \'93It\'92s very rude of him,\'94 she said,\
      \'93To come and spoil the fun!\'94\
\
     The sea was wet as wet could be,\
      The sands were dry as dry.\
     You could not see a cloud, because\
      No cloud was in the sky:\
     No birds were flying over head--\
      There were no birds to fly.\
\
     The Walrus and the Carpenter\
      Were walking close at hand;\
     They wept like anything to see\
      Such quantities of sand:\
     \'93If this were only cleared away,\'94\
       They said, \'93it WOULD be grand!\'94\
\
     \'93If seven maids with seven mops\
      Swept it for half a year,\
     Do you suppose,\'94 the Walrus said,\
      \'93That they could get it clear?\'94\
      \'93I doubt it,\'94 said the Carpenter,\
      And shed a bitter tear.\
\
     \'93O Oysters, come and walk with us!\'94\
       The Walrus did beseech.\
     \'93A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,\
      Along the briny beach:\
     We cannot do with more than four,\
      To give a hand to each.\'94\
\
     The eldest Oyster looked at him.\
      But never a word he said:\
     The eldest Oyster winked his eye,\
      And shook his heavy head--\
     Meaning to say he did not choose\
      To leave the oyster-bed.\
\
     But four young oysters hurried up,\
      All eager for the treat:\
     Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,\
      Their shoes were clean and neat--\
     And this was odd, because, you know,\
      They hadn\'92t any feet.\
\
     Four other Oysters followed them,\
      And yet another four;\
     And thick and fast they came at last,\
      And more, and more, and more--\
     All hopping through the frothy waves,\
      And scrambling to the shore.\
\
     The Walrus and the Carpenter\
      Walked on a mile or so,\
     And then they rested on a rock\
      Conveniently low:\
     And all the little Oysters stood\
      And waited in a row.\
\
     \'93The time has come,\'94 the Walrus said,\
      \'93To talk of many things:\
     Of shoes--and ships--and sealing-wax--\
      Of cabbages--and kings--\
     And why the sea is boiling hot--\
      And whether pigs have wings.\'94\
\
     \'93But wait a bit,\'94 the Oysters cried,\
      \'93Before we have our chat;\
     For some of us are out of breath,\
      And all of us are fat!\'94\
      \'93No hurry!\'94 said the Carpenter.\
      They thanked him much for that.\
\
     \'93A loaf of bread,\'94 the Walrus said,\
      \'93Is what we chiefly need:\
     Pepper and vinegar besides\
      Are very good indeed--\
     Now if you\'92re ready Oysters dear,\
      We can begin to feed.\'94\
\
     \'93But not on us!\'94 the Oysters cried,\
      Turning a little blue,\
     \'93After such kindness, that would be\
      A dismal thing to do!\'94\
      \'93The night is fine,\'94 the Walrus said\
      \'93Do you admire the view?\
\
     \'93It was so kind of you to come!\
      And you are very nice!\'94\
      The Carpenter said nothing but\
      \'93Cut us another slice:\
     I wish you were not quite so deaf--\
      I\'92ve had to ask you twice!\'94\
\
     \'93It seems a shame,\'94 the Walrus said,\
      \'93To play them such a trick,\
     After we\'92ve brought them out so far,\
      And made them trot so quick!\'94\
      The Carpenter said nothing but\
      \'93The butter\'92s spread too thick!\'94\
\
     \'93I weep for you,\'94 the Walrus said.\
      \'93I deeply sympathize.\'94\
      With sobs and tears he sorted out\
      Those of the largest size.\
     Holding his pocket handkerchief\
      Before his streaming eyes.\
\
     \'93O Oysters,\'94 said the Carpenter.\
      \'93You\'92ve had a pleasant run!\
     Shall we be trotting home again?\'94\
       But answer came there none--\
     And that was scarcely odd, because\
      They\'92d eaten every one.\'92\
\
\'91I like the Walrus best,\'92 said Alice: \'91because you see he was a LITTLE\
sorry for the poor oysters.\'92\
\
\'91He ate more than the Carpenter, though,\'92 said Tweedledee. \'91You see he\
held his handkerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldn\'92t count how\
many he took: contrariwise.\'92\
\
\'91That was mean!\'92 Alice said indignantly. \'91Then I like the Carpenter\
best--if he didn\'92t eat so many as the Walrus.\'92\
\
\'91But he ate as many as he could get,\'92 said Tweedledum.\
\
This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, \'91Well! They were BOTH\
very unpleasant characters--\'92 Here she checked herself in some alarm,\
at hearing something that sounded to her like the puffing of a large\
steam-engine in the wood near them, though she feared it was more likely\
to be a wild beast. \'91Are there any lions or tigers about here?\'92 she\
asked timidly.\
\
\'91It\'92s only the Red King snoring,\'92 said Tweedledee.\
\
\'91Come and look at him!\'92 the brothers cried, and they each took one of\
Alice\'92s hands, and led her up to where the King was sleeping.\
\
\'91Isn\'92t he a LOVELY sight?\'92 said Tweedledum.\
\
Alice couldn\'92t say honestly that he was. He had a tall red night-cap on,\
with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidy heap,\
and snoring loud--\'91fit to snore his head off!\'92 as Tweedledum remarked.\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid he\'92ll catch cold with lying on the damp grass,\'92 said Alice,\
who was a very thoughtful little girl.\
\
\'91He\'92s dreaming now,\'92 said Tweedledee: \'91and what do you think he\'92s\
dreaming about?\'92\
\
Alice said \'91Nobody can guess that.\'92\
\
\'91Why, about YOU!\'92 Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his hands triumphantly.\
\'91And if he left off dreaming about you, where do you suppose you\'92d be?\'92\
\
\'91Where I am now, of course,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Not you!\'92 Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. \'91You\'92d be nowhere. Why,\
you\'92re only a sort of thing in his dream!\'92\
\
\'91If that there King was to wake,\'92 added Tweedledum, \'91you\'92d go\
out--bang!--just like a candle!\'92\
\
\'91I shouldn\'92t!\'92 Alice exclaimed indignantly. \'91Besides, if I\'92M only a sort\
of thing in his dream, what are YOU, I should like to know?\'92\
\
\'91Ditto\'92 said Tweedledum.\
\
\'91Ditto, ditto\'92 cried Tweedledee.\
\
He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn\'92t help saying, \'91Hush! You\'92ll\
be waking him, I\'92m afraid, if you make so much noise.\'92\
\
\'91Well, it no use YOUR talking about waking him,\'92 said Tweedledum, \'91when\
you\'92re only one of the things in his dream. You know very well you\'92re\
not real.\'92\
\
\'91I AM real!\'92 said Alice and began to cry.\
\
\'91You won\'92t make yourself a bit realler by crying,\'92 Tweedledee remarked:\
\'91there\'92s nothing to cry about.\'92\
\
\'91If I wasn\'92t real,\'92 Alice said--half-laughing through her tears, it all\
seemed so ridiculous--\'91I shouldn\'92t be able to cry.\'92\
\
\'91I hope you don\'92t suppose those are real tears?\'92 Tweedledum interrupted\
in a tone of great contempt.\
\
\'91I know they\'92re talking nonsense,\'92 Alice thought to herself: \'91and it\'92s\
foolish to cry about it.\'92 So she brushed away her tears, and went on as\
cheerfully as she could. \'91At any rate I\'92d better be getting out of the\
wood, for really it\'92s coming on very dark. Do you think it\'92s going to\
rain?\'92\
\
Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and his brother, and\
looked up into it. \'91No, I don\'92t think it is,\'92 he said: \'91at least--not\
under HERE. Nohow.\'92\
\
\'91But it may rain OUTSIDE?\'92\
\
\'91It may--if it chooses,\'92 said Tweedledee: \'91we\'92ve no objection.\
Contrariwise.\'92\
\
\'91Selfish things!\'92 thought Alice, and she was just going to say\
\'91Good-night\'92 and leave them, when Tweedledum sprang out from under the\
umbrella and seized her by the wrist.\
\
\'91Do you see THAT?\'92 he said, in a voice choking with passion, and\
his eyes grew large and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with a\
trembling finger at a small white thing lying under the tree.\
\
\'91It\'92s only a rattle,\'92 Alice said, after a careful examination of the\
little white thing. \'91Not a rattleSNAKE, you know,\'92 she added hastily,\
thinking that he was frightened: \'91only an old rattle--quite old and\
broken.\'92\
\
\'91I knew it was!\'92 cried Tweedledum, beginning to stamp about wildly and\
tear his hair. \'91It\'92s spoilt, of course!\'92 Here he looked at Tweedledee,\
who immediately sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself under\
the umbrella.\
\
Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in a soothing tone, \'91You\
needn\'92t be so angry about an old rattle.\'92\
\
\'91But it isn\'92t old!\'92 Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury than ever. \'91It\'92s\
new, I tell you--I bought it yesterday--my nice new RATTLE!\'92 and his\
voice rose to a perfect scream.\
\
All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up the umbrella,\
with himself in it: which was such an extraordinary thing to do, that it\
quite took off Alice\'92s attention from the angry brother. But he couldn\'92t\
quite succeed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundled up in the\
umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, opening and shutting\
his mouth and his large eyes--\'91looking more like a fish than anything\
else,\'92 Alice thought.\
\
\'91Of course you agree to have a battle?\'92 Tweedledum said in a calmer\
tone.\
\
\'91I suppose so,\'92 the other sulkily replied, as he crawled out of the\
umbrella: \'91only SHE must help us to dress up, you know.\'92\
\
So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand into the wood, and returned\
in a minute with their arms full of things--such as bolsters, blankets,\
hearth-rugs, table-cloths, dish-covers and coal-scuttles. \'91I hope you\'92re\
a good hand at pinning and tying strings?\'92 Tweedledum remarked. \'91Every\
one of these things has got to go on, somehow or other.\'92\
\
Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss made about anything\
in all her life--the way those two bustled about--and the quantity of\
things they put on--and the trouble they gave her in tying strings and\
fastening buttons--\'91Really they\'92ll be more like bundles of old clothes\
than anything else, by the time they\'92re ready!\'92 she said to herself, as\
she arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee, \'91to keep his head\
from being cut off,\'92 as he said.\
\
\'91You know,\'92 he added very gravely, \'91it\'92s one of the most serious things\
that can possibly happen to one in a battle--to get one\'92s head cut off.\'92\
\
Alice laughed aloud: but she managed to turn it into a cough, for fear\
of hurting his feelings.\
\
\'91Do I look very pale?\'92 said Tweedledum, coming up to have his helmet\
tied on. (He CALLED it a helmet, though it certainly looked much more\
like a saucepan.)\
\
\'91Well--yes--a LITTLE,\'92 Alice replied gently.\
\
\'91I\'92m very brave generally,\'92 he went on in a low voice: \'91only to-day I\
happen to have a headache.\'92\
\
\'91And I\'92VE got a toothache!\'92 said Tweedledee, who had overheard the\
remark. \'91I\'92m far worse off than you!\'92\
\
\'91Then you\'92d better not fight to-day,\'92 said Alice, thinking it a good\
opportunity to make peace.\
\
\'91We MUST have a bit of a fight, but I don\'92t care about going on long,\'92\
said Tweedledum. \'91What\'92s the time now?\'92\
\
Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said \'91Half-past four.\'92\
\
\'91Let\'92s fight till six, and then have dinner,\'92 said Tweedledum.\
\
\'91Very well,\'92 the other said, rather sadly: \'91and SHE can watch us--only\
you\'92d better not come VERY close,\'92 he added: \'91I generally hit everything\
I can see--when I get really excited.\'92\
\
\'91And _I_ hit everything within reach,\'92 cried Tweedledum, \'91whether I can\
see it or not!\'92\
\
Alice laughed. \'91You must hit the TREES pretty often, I should think,\'92\
she said.\
\
Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. \'91I don\'92t suppose,\'92\
he said, \'91there\'92ll be a tree left standing, for ever so far round, by\
the time we\'92ve finished!\'92\
\
\'91And all about a rattle!\'92 said Alice, still hoping to make them a LITTLE\
ashamed of fighting for such a trifle.\
\
\'91I shouldn\'92t have minded it so much,\'92 said Tweedledum, \'91if it hadn\'92t\
been a new one.\'92\
\
\'91I wish the monstrous crow would come!\'92 thought Alice.\
\
\'91There\'92s only one sword, you know,\'92 Tweedledum said to his brother:\
\'91but you can have the umbrella--it\'92s quite as sharp. Only we must begin\
quick. It\'92s getting as dark as it can.\'92\
\
\'91And darker,\'92 said Tweedledee.\
\
It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought there must be a\
thunderstorm coming on. \'91What a thick black cloud that is!\'92 she said.\
\'91And how fast it comes! Why, I do believe it\'92s got wings!\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s the crow!\'92 Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice of alarm: and\
the two brothers took to their heels and were out of sight in a moment.\
\
Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under a large tree.\
\'91It can never get at me HERE,\'92 she thought: \'91it\'92s far too large to\
squeeze itself in among the trees. But I wish it wouldn\'92t flap its wings\
so--it makes quite a hurricane in the wood--here\'92s somebody\'92s shawl\
being blown away!\'92\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER V. Wool and Water\
\
She caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about for the owner: in\
another moment the White Queen came running wildly through the wood,\
with both arms stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alice very\
civilly went to meet her with the shawl.\
\
\'91I\'92m very glad I happened to be in the way,\'92 Alice said, as she helped\
her to put on her shawl again.\
\
The White Queen only looked at her in a helpless frightened sort of way,\
and kept repeating something in a whisper to herself that sounded like\
\'91bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter,\'92 and Alice felt that if there was\
to be any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So she began\
rather timidly: \'91Am I addressing the White Queen?\'92\
\
\'91Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing,\'92 The Queen said. \'91It isn\'92t MY\
notion of the thing, at all.\'92\
\
Alice thought it would never do to have an argument at the very\
beginning of their conversation, so she smiled and said, \'91If your\
Majesty will only tell me the right way to begin, I\'92ll do it as well as\
I can.\'92\
\
\'91But I don\'92t want it done at all!\'92 groaned the poor Queen. \'91I\'92ve been\
a-dressing myself for the last two hours.\'92\
\
It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, if she had got\
some one else to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy. \'91Every\
single thing\'92s crooked,\'92 Alice thought to herself, \'91and she\'92s all over\
pins!--may I put your shawl straight for you?\'92 she added aloud.\
\
\'91I don\'92t know what\'92s the matter with it!\'92 the Queen said, in a\
melancholy voice. \'91It\'92s out of temper, I think. I\'92ve pinned it here, and\
I\'92ve pinned it there, but there\'92s no pleasing it!\'92\
\
\'91It CAN\'92T go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side,\'92 Alice\
said, as she gently put it right for her; \'91and, dear me, what a state\
your hair is in!\'92\
\
\'91The brush has got entangled in it!\'92 the Queen said with a sigh. \'91And I\
lost the comb yesterday.\'92\
\
Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to get the hair\
into order. \'91Come, you look rather better now!\'92 she said, after altering\
most of the pins. \'91But really you should have a lady\'92s maid!\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m sure I\'92ll take you with pleasure!\'92 the Queen said. \'91Twopence a\
week, and jam every other day.\'92\
\
Alice couldn\'92t help laughing, as she said, \'91I don\'92t want you to hire\
ME--and I don\'92t care for jam.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s very good jam,\'92 said the Queen.\
\
\'91Well, I don\'92t want any TO-DAY, at any rate.\'92\
\
\'91You couldn\'92t have it if you DID want it,\'92 the Queen said. \'91The rule is,\
jam to-morrow and jam yesterday--but never jam to-day.\'92\
\
\'91It MUST come sometimes to \'93jam to-day,\'94\'92 Alice objected.\
\
\'91No, it can\'92t,\'92 said the Queen. \'91It\'92s jam every OTHER day: to-day isn\'92t\
any OTHER day, you know.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t understand you,\'92 said Alice. \'91It\'92s dreadfully confusing!\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s the effect of living backwards,\'92 the Queen said kindly: \'91it\
always makes one a little giddy at first--\'92\
\
\'91Living backwards!\'92 Alice repeated in great astonishment. \'91I never heard\
of such a thing!\'92\
\
\'91--but there\'92s one great advantage in it, that one\'92s memory works both\
ways.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m sure MINE only works one way,\'92 Alice remarked. \'91I can\'92t remember\
things before they happen.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,\'92 the Queen\
remarked.\
\
\'91What sort of things do YOU remember best?\'92 Alice ventured to ask.\
\
\'91Oh, things that happened the week after next,\'92 the Queen replied in a\
careless tone. \'91For instance, now,\'92 she went on, sticking a large piece\
of plaster on her finger as she spoke, \'91there\'92s the King\'92s\
Messenger. He\'92s in prison now, being punished: and the trial doesn\'92t\
even begin till next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of\
all.\'92\
\
\'91Suppose he never commits the crime?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91That would be all the better, wouldn\'92t it?\'92 the Queen said, as she\
bound the plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.\
\
Alice felt there was no denying THAT. \'91Of course it would be all\
the better,\'92 she said: \'91but it wouldn\'92t be all the better his being\
punished.\'92\
\
\'91You\'92re wrong THERE, at any rate,\'92 said the Queen: \'91were YOU ever\
punished?\'92\
\
\'91Only for faults,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91And you were all the better for it, I know!\'92 the Queen said\
triumphantly.\
\
\'91Yes, but then I HAD done the things I was punished for,\'92 said Alice:\
\'91that makes all the difference.\'92\
\
\'91But if you HADN\'92T done them,\'92 the Queen said, \'91that would have been\
better still; better, and better, and better!\'92 Her voice went higher\
with each \'91better,\'92 till it got quite to a squeak at last.\
\
Alice was just beginning to say \'91There\'92s a mistake somewhere--,\'92 when\
the Queen began screaming so loud that she had to leave the sentence\
unfinished. \'91Oh, oh, oh!\'92 shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about as\
if she wanted to shake it off. \'91My finger\'92s bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!\'92\
\
Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steam-engine, that\
Alice had to hold both her hands over her ears.\
\
\'91What IS the matter?\'92 she said, as soon as there was a chance of making\
herself heard. \'91Have you pricked your finger?\'92\
\
\'91I haven\'92t pricked it YET,\'92 the Queen said, \'91but I soon shall--oh, oh,\
oh!\'92\
\
\'91When do you expect to do it?\'92 Alice asked, feeling very much inclined\
to laugh.\
\
\'91When I fasten my shawl again,\'92 the poor Queen groaned out: \'91the brooch\
will come undone directly. Oh, oh!\'92 As she said the words the brooch\
flew open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp it\
again.\
\
\'91Take care!\'92 cried Alice. \'91You\'92re holding it all crooked!\'92 And she\
caught at the brooch; but it was too late: the pin had slipped, and the\
Queen had pricked her finger.\
\
\'91That accounts for the bleeding, you see,\'92 she said to Alice with a\
smile. \'91Now you understand the way things happen here.\'92\
\
\'91But why don\'92t you scream now?\'92 Alice asked, holding her hands ready to\
put over her ears again.\
\
\'91Why, I\'92ve done all the screaming already,\'92 said the Queen. \'91What would\
be the good of having it all over again?\'92\
\
By this time it was getting light. \'91The crow must have flown away, I\
think,\'92 said Alice: \'91I\'92m so glad it\'92s gone. I thought it was the night\
coming on.\'92\
\
\'91I wish _I_ could manage to be glad!\'92 the Queen said. \'91Only I never\
can remember the rule. You must be very happy, living in this wood, and\
being glad whenever you like!\'92\
\
\'91Only it is so VERY lonely here!\'92 Alice said in a melancholy voice; and\
at the thought of her loneliness two large tears came rolling down her\
cheeks.\
\
\'91Oh, don\'92t go on like that!\'92 cried the poor Queen, wringing her hands in\
despair. \'91Consider what a great girl you are. Consider what a long way\
you\'92ve come to-day. Consider what o\'92clock it is. Consider anything, only\
don\'92t cry!\'92\
\
Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst of her tears.\
\'91Can YOU keep from crying by considering things?\'92 she asked.\
\
\'91That\'92s the way it\'92s done,\'92 the Queen said with great decision: \'91nobody\
can do two things at once, you know. Let\'92s consider your age to begin\
with--how old are you?\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m seven and a half exactly.\'92\
\
\'91You needn\'92t say \'93exactually,\'94\'92 the Queen remarked: \'91I can believe\
it without that. Now I\'92ll give YOU something to believe. I\'92m just one\
hundred and one, five months and a day.\'92\
\
\'91I can\'92t believe THAT!\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Can\'92t you?\'92 the Queen said in a pitying tone. \'91Try again: draw a long\
breath, and shut your eyes.\'92\
\
Alice laughed. \'91There\'92s no use trying,\'92 she said: \'91one CAN\'92T believe\
impossible things.\'92\
\
\'91I daresay you haven\'92t had much practice,\'92 said the Queen. \'91When I was\
your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I\'92ve\
believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast. There goes\
the shawl again!\'92\
\
The brooch had come undone as she spoke, and a sudden gust of wind blew\
the Queen\'92s shawl across a little brook. The Queen spread out her arms\
again, and went flying after it, and this time she succeeded in catching\
it for herself. \'91I\'92ve got it!\'92 she cried in a triumphant tone. \'91Now you\
shall see me pin it on again, all by myself!\'92\
\
\'91Then I hope your finger is better now?\'92 Alice said very politely, as\
she crossed the little brook after the Queen.\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
\'91Oh, much better!\'92 cried the Queen, her voice rising to a squeak as she\
went on. \'91Much be-etter! Be-etter! Be-e-e-etter! Be-e-ehh!\'92 The last\
word ended in a long bleat, so like a sheep that Alice quite started.\
\
She looked at the Queen, who seemed to have suddenly wrapped herself up\
in wool. Alice rubbed her eyes, and looked again. She couldn\'92t make out\
what had happened at all. Was she in a shop? And was that really--was it\
really a SHEEP that was sitting on the other side of the counter? Rub as\
she could, she could make nothing more of it: she was in a little dark\
shop, leaning with her elbows on the counter, and opposite to her was\
an old Sheep, sitting in an arm-chair knitting, and every now and then\
leaving off to look at her through a great pair of spectacles.\
\
\'91What is it you want to buy?\'92 the Sheep said at last, looking up for a\
moment from her knitting.\
\
\'91I don\'92t QUITE know yet,\'92 Alice said, very gently. \'91I should like to\
look all round me first, if I might.\'92\
\
\'91You may look in front of you, and on both sides, if you like,\'92 said the\
Sheep: \'91but you can\'92t look ALL round you--unless you\'92ve got eyes at the\
back of your head.\'92\
\
But these, as it happened, Alice had NOT got: so she contented herself\
with turning round, looking at the shelves as she came to them.\
\
The shop seemed to be full of all manner of curious things--but the\
oddest part of it all was, that whenever she looked hard at any shelf,\
to make out exactly what it had on it, that particular shelf was always\
quite empty: though the others round it were crowded as full as they\
could hold.\
\
\'91Things flow about so here!\'92 she said at last in a plaintive tone, after\
she had spent a minute or so in vainly pursuing a large bright thing,\
that looked sometimes like a doll and sometimes like a work-box, and was\
always in the shelf next above the one she was looking at. \'91And this one\
is the most provoking of all--but I\'92ll tell you what--\'92 she added, as a\
sudden thought struck her, \'91I\'92ll follow it up to the very top shelf of\
all. It\'92ll puzzle it to go through the ceiling, I expect!\'92\
\
But even this plan failed: the \'91thing\'92 went through the ceiling as\
quietly as possible, as if it were quite used to it.\
\
\'91Are you a child or a teetotum?\'92 the Sheep said, as she took up another\
pair of needles. \'91You\'92ll make me giddy soon, if you go on turning round\
like that.\'92 She was now working with fourteen pairs at once, and Alice\
couldn\'92t help looking at her in great astonishment.\
\
\'91How CAN she knit with so many?\'92 the puzzled child thought to herself.\
\'91She gets more and more like a porcupine every minute!\'92\
\
\'91Can you row?\'92 the Sheep asked, handing her a pair of knitting-needles\
as she spoke.\
\
\'91Yes, a little--but not on land--and not with needles--\'92 Alice was\
beginning to say, when suddenly the needles turned into oars in her\
hands, and she found they were in a little boat, gliding along between\
banks: so there was nothing for it but to do her best.\
\
\'91Feather!\'92 cried the Sheep, as she took up another pair of needles.\
\
This didn\'92t sound like a remark that needed any answer, so Alice said\
nothing, but pulled away. There was something very queer about the\
water, she thought, as every now and then the oars got fast in it, and\
would hardly come out again.\
\
\'91Feather! Feather!\'92 the Sheep cried again, taking more needles. \'91You\'92ll\
be catching a crab directly.\'92\
\
\'91A dear little crab!\'92 thought Alice. \'91I should like that.\'92\
\
\'91Didn\'92t you hear me say \'93Feather\'94?\'92 the Sheep cried angrily, taking up\
quite a bunch of needles.\
\
\'91Indeed I did,\'92 said Alice: \'91you\'92ve said it very often--and very loud.\
Please, where ARE the crabs?\'92\
\
\'91In the water, of course!\'92 said the Sheep, sticking some of the needles\
into her hair, as her hands were full. \'91Feather, I say!\'92\
\
\'91WHY do you say \'93feather\'94 so often?\'92 Alice asked at last, rather vexed.\
\'91I\'92m not a bird!\'92\
\
\'91You are,\'92 said the Sheep: \'91you\'92re a little goose.\'92\
\
This offended Alice a little, so there was no more conversation for a\
minute or two, while the boat glided gently on, sometimes among beds of\
weeds (which made the oars stick fast in the water, worse then ever),\
and sometimes under trees, but always with the same tall river-banks\
frowning over their heads.\
\
\'91Oh, please! There are some scented rushes!\'92 Alice cried in a sudden\
transport of delight. \'91There really are--and SUCH beauties!\'92\
\
\'91You needn\'92t say \'93please\'94 to ME about \'91em,\'92 the Sheep said, without\
looking up from her knitting: \'91I didn\'92t put \'91em there, and I\'92m not going\
to take \'91em away.\'92\
\
\'91No, but I meant--please, may we wait and pick some?\'92 Alice pleaded. \'91If\
you don\'92t mind stopping the boat for a minute.\'92\
\
\'91How am _I_ to stop it?\'92 said the Sheep. \'91If you leave off rowing, it\'92ll\
stop of itself.\'92\
\
So the boat was left to drift down the stream as it would, till it\
glided gently in among the waving rushes. And then the little sleeves\
were carefully rolled up, and the little arms were plunged in elbow-deep\
to get the rushes a good long way down before breaking them off--and for\
a while Alice forgot all about the Sheep and the knitting, as she\
bent over the side of the boat, with just the ends of her tangled hair\
dipping into the water--while with bright eager eyes she caught at one\
bunch after another of the darling scented rushes.\
\
\'91I only hope the boat won\'92t tipple over!\'92 she said to herself. \'91Oh, WHAT\
a lovely one! Only I couldn\'92t quite reach it.\'92 \'91And it certainly DID\
seem a little provoking (\'91almost as if it happened on purpose,\'92 she\
thought) that, though she managed to pick plenty of beautiful rushes as\
the boat glided by, there was always a more lovely one that she couldn\'92t\
reach.\
\
\'91The prettiest are always further!\'92 she said at last, with a sigh at the\
obstinacy of the rushes in growing so far off, as, with flushed cheeks\
and dripping hair and hands, she scrambled back into her place, and\
began to arrange her new-found treasures.\
\
What mattered it to her just then that the rushes had begun to fade, and\
to lose all their scent and beauty, from the very moment that she\
picked them? Even real scented rushes, you know, last only a very little\
while--and these, being dream-rushes, melted away almost like snow, as\
they lay in heaps at her feet--but Alice hardly noticed this, there were\
so many other curious things to think about.\
\
They hadn\'92t gone much farther before the blade of one of the oars got\
fast in the water and WOULDN\'92T come out again (so Alice explained it\
afterwards), and the consequence was that the handle of it caught her\
under the chin, and, in spite of a series of little shrieks of \'91Oh, oh,\
oh!\'92 from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat, and down among\
the heap of rushes.\
\
However, she wasn\'92t hurt, and was soon up again: the Sheep went on with\
her knitting all the while, just as if nothing had happened. \'91That was\
a nice crab you caught!\'92 she remarked, as Alice got back into her place,\
very much relieved to find herself still in the boat.\
\
\'91Was it? I didn\'92t see it,\'92 Said Alice, peeping cautiously over the side\
of the boat into the dark water. \'91I wish it hadn\'92t let go--I should\
so like to see a little crab to take home with me!\'92 But the Sheep only\
laughed scornfully, and went on with her knitting.\
\
\'91Are there many crabs here?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Crabs, and all sorts of things,\'92 said the Sheep: \'91plenty of choice,\
only make up your mind. Now, what DO you want to buy?\'92\
\
\'91To buy!\'92 Alice echoed in a tone that was half astonished and half\
frightened--for the oars, and the boat, and the river, had vanished all\
in a moment, and she was back again in the little dark shop.\
\
\'91I should like to buy an egg, please,\'92 she said timidly. \'91How do you\
sell them?\'92\
\
\'91Fivepence farthing for one--Twopence for two,\'92 the Sheep replied.\
\
\'91Then two are cheaper than one?\'92 Alice said in a surprised tone, taking\
out her purse.\
\
\'91Only you MUST eat them both, if you buy two,\'92 said the Sheep.\
\
\'91Then I\'92ll have ONE, please,\'92 said Alice, as she put the money down on\
the counter. For she thought to herself, \'91They mightn\'92t be at all nice,\
you know.\'92\
\
The Sheep took the money, and put it away in a box: then she said \'91I\
never put things into people\'92s hands--that would never do--you must get\
it for yourself.\'92 And so saying, she went off to the other end of the\
shop, and set the egg upright on a shelf.\
\
\'91I wonder WHY it wouldn\'92t do?\'92 thought Alice, as she groped her way\
among the tables and chairs, for the shop was very dark towards the end.\
\'91The egg seems to get further away the more I walk towards it. Let me\
see, is this a chair? Why, it\'92s got branches, I declare! How very odd to\
find trees growing here! And actually here\'92s a little brook! Well, this\
is the very queerest shop I ever saw!\'92\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
\
So she went on, wondering more and more at every step, as everything\
turned into a tree the moment she came up to it, and she quite expected\
the egg to do the same.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER VI. Humpty Dumpty\
\
However, the egg only got larger and larger, and more and more human:\
when she had come within a few yards of it, she saw that it had eyes\
and a nose and mouth; and when she had come close to it, she saw clearly\
that it was HUMPTY DUMPTY himself. \'91It can\'92t be anybody else!\'92 she said\
to herself. \'91I\'92m as certain of it, as if his name were written all over\
his face.\'92\
\
It might have been written a hundred times, easily, on that enormous\
face. Humpty Dumpty was sitting with his legs crossed, like a Turk, on\
the top of a high wall--such a narrow one that Alice quite wondered how\
he could keep his balance--and, as his eyes were steadily fixed in the\
opposite direction, and he didn\'92t take the least notice of her, she\
thought he must be a stuffed figure after all.\
\
\'91And how exactly like an egg he is!\'92 she said aloud, standing with her\
hands ready to catch him, for she was every moment expecting him to\
fall.\
\
\'91It\'92s VERY provoking,\'92 Humpty Dumpty said after a long silence, looking\
away from Alice as he spoke, \'91to be called an egg--VERY!\'92\
\
\'91I said you LOOKED like an egg, Sir,\'92 Alice gently explained. \'91And some\
eggs are very pretty, you know\'92 she added, hoping to turn her remark\
into a sort of a compliment.\
\
\'91Some people,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty, looking away from her as usual, \'91have\
no more sense than a baby!\'92\
\
Alice didn\'92t know what to say to this: it wasn\'92t at all like\
conversation, she thought, as he never said anything to HER; in fact,\
his last remark was evidently addressed to a tree--so she stood and\
softly repeated to herself:--\
\
\
     \'91Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall:\
     Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.\
     All the King\'92s horses and all the King\'92s men\
     Couldn\'92t put Humpty Dumpty in his place again.\'92\
\
\
\'91That last line is much too long for the poetry,\'92 she added, almost out\
loud, forgetting that Humpty Dumpty would hear her.\
\
\'91Don\'92t stand there chattering to yourself like that,\'92 Humpty Dumpty\
said, looking at her for the first time, \'91but tell me your name and your\
business.\'92\
\
\'91My NAME is Alice, but--\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s a stupid enough name!\'92 Humpty Dumpty interrupted impatiently.\
\'91What does it mean?\'92\
\
\'91MUST a name mean something?\'92 Alice asked doubtfully.\
\
\'91Of course it must,\'92 Humpty Dumpty said with a short laugh: \'91MY name\
means the shape I am--and a good handsome shape it is, too. With a name\
like yours, you might be any shape, almost.\'92\
\
\'91Why do you sit out here all alone?\'92 said Alice, not wishing to begin an\
argument.\
\
\'91Why, because there\'92s nobody with me!\'92 cried Humpty Dumpty. \'91Did you\
think I didn\'92t know the answer to THAT? Ask another.\'92\
\
\'91Don\'92t you think you\'92d be safer down on the ground?\'92 Alice went on, not\
with any idea of making another riddle, but simply in her good-natured\
anxiety for the queer creature. \'91That wall is so VERY narrow!\'92\
\
\'91What tremendously easy riddles you ask!\'92 Humpty Dumpty growled out. \'91Of\
course I don\'92t think so! Why, if ever I DID fall off--which there\'92s no\
chance of--but IF I did--\'92 Here he pursed up his lips and looked so solemn\
and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing. \'91IF I did fall,\'92 he\
went on, \'91THE KING HAS PROMISED ME--ah, you may turn pale, if you like!\
You didn\'92t think I was going to say that, did you? THE KING HAS PROMISED ME--\
WITH HIS VERY OWN MOUTH--to--to--\'92\
\
\'91To send all his horses and all his men,\'92 Alice interrupted, rather\
unwisely.\
\
\'91Now I declare that\'92s too bad!\'92 Humpty Dumpty cried, breaking into a\
sudden passion. \'91You\'92ve been listening at doors--and behind trees--and\
down chimneys--or you couldn\'92t have known it!\'92\
\
\'91I haven\'92t, indeed!\'92 Alice said very gently. \'91It\'92s in a book.\'92\
\
\'91Ah, well! They may write such things in a BOOK,\'92 Humpty Dumpty said in\
a calmer tone. \'91That\'92s what you call a History of England, that is.\
Now, take a good look at me! I\'92m one that has spoken to a King, _I_ am:\
mayhap you\'92ll never see such another: and to show you I\'92m not proud, you\
may shake hands with me!\'92 And he grinned almost from ear to ear, as he\
leant forwards (and as nearly as possible fell off the wall in doing so)\
and offered Alice his hand. She watched him a little anxiously as she\
took it. \'91If he smiled much more, the ends of his mouth might meet\
behind,\'92 she thought: \'91and then I don\'92t know what would happen to his\
head! I\'92m afraid it would come off!\'92\
\
\'91Yes, all his horses and all his men,\'92 Humpty Dumpty went on. \'91They\'92d\
pick me up again in a minute, THEY would! However, this conversation is\
going on a little too fast: let\'92s go back to the last remark but one.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid I can\'92t quite remember it,\'92 Alice said very politely.\
\
\'91In that case we start fresh,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty, \'91and it\'92s my turn\
to choose a subject--\'92 (\'91He talks about it just as if it was a game!\'92\
thought Alice.) \'91So here\'92s a question for you. How old did you say you\
were?\'92\
\
Alice made a short calculation, and said \'91Seven years and six months.\'92\
\
\'91Wrong!\'92 Humpty Dumpty exclaimed triumphantly. \'91You never said a word\
like it!\'92\
\
\'91I though you meant \'93How old ARE you?\'94\'92 Alice explained.\
\
\'91If I\'92d meant that, I\'92d have said it,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty.\
\
Alice didn\'92t want to begin another argument, so she said nothing.\
\
\'91Seven years and six months!\'92 Humpty Dumpty repeated thoughtfully. \'91An\
uncomfortable sort of age. Now if you\'92d asked MY advice, I\'92d have said\
\'93Leave off at seven\'94--but it\'92s too late now.\'92\
\
\'91I never ask advice about growing,\'92 Alice said indignantly.\
\
\'91Too proud?\'92 the other inquired.\
\
Alice felt even more indignant at this suggestion. \'91I mean,\'92 she said,\
\'91that one can\'92t help growing older.\'92\
\
\'91ONE can\'92t, perhaps,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty, \'91but TWO can. With proper\
assistance, you might have left off at seven.\'92\
\
\'91What a beautiful belt you\'92ve got on!\'92 Alice suddenly remarked.\
\
(They had had quite enough of the subject of age, she thought: and if\
they really were to take turns in choosing subjects, it was her turn\
now.) \'91At least,\'92 she corrected herself on second thoughts, \'91a beautiful\
cravat, I should have said--no, a belt, I mean--I beg your pardon!\'92 she\
added in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked thoroughly offended, and she\
began to wish she hadn\'92t chosen that subject. \'91If I only knew,\'92 she\
thought to herself, \'91which was neck and which was waist!\'92\
\
Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry, though he said nothing for a\
minute or two. When he DID speak again, it was in a deep growl.\
\
\'91It is a--MOST--PROVOKING--thing,\'92 he said at last, \'91when a person\
doesn\'92t know a cravat from a belt!\'92\
\
\'91I know it\'92s very ignorant of me,\'92 Alice said, in so humble a tone that\
Humpty Dumpty relented.\
\
\'91It\'92s a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. It\'92s a present\
from the White King and Queen. There now!\'92\
\
\'91Is it really?\'92 said Alice, quite pleased to find that she HAD chosen a\
good subject, after all.\
\
\'91They gave it me,\'92 Humpty Dumpty continued thoughtfully, as he crossed\
one knee over the other and clasped his hands round it, \'91they gave it\
me--for an un-birthday present.\'92\
\
\'91I beg your pardon?\'92 Alice said with a puzzled air.\
\
\'91I\'92m not offended,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty.\
\
\'91I mean, what IS an un-birthday present?\'92\
\
\'91A present given when it isn\'92t your birthday, of course.\'92\
\
Alice considered a little. \'91I like birthday presents best,\'92 she said at\
last.\
\
\'91You don\'92t know what you\'92re talking about!\'92 cried Humpty Dumpty. \'91How\
many days are there in a year?\'92\
\
\'91Three hundred and sixty-five,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91And how many birthdays have you?\'92\
\
\'91One.\'92\
\
\'91And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five, what remains?\'92\
\
\'91Three hundred and sixty-four, of course.\'92\
\
Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. \'91I\'92d rather see that done on paper,\'92 he\
said.\
\
Alice couldn\'92t help smiling as she took out her memorandum-book, and\
worked the sum for him:\
\
\
               365\
                1\
               ____\
\
               364\
               ___\
\
Humpty Dumpty took the book, and looked at it carefully. \'91That seems to\
be done right--\'92 he began.\
\
\'91You\'92re holding it upside down!\'92 Alice interrupted.\
\
\'91To be sure I was!\'92 Humpty Dumpty said gaily, as she turned it round for\
him. \'91I thought it looked a little queer. As I was saying, that SEEMS\
to be done right--though I haven\'92t time to look it over thoroughly just\
now--and that shows that there are three hundred and sixty-four days\
when you might get un-birthday presents--\'92\
\
\'91Certainly,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91And only ONE for birthday presents, you know. There\'92s glory for you!\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know what you mean by \'93glory,\'94\'92 Alice said.\
\
Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. \'91Of course you don\'92t--till I tell\
you. I meant \'93there\'92s a nice knock-down argument for you!\'94\'92\
\
\'91But \'93glory\'94 doesn\'92t mean \'93a nice knock-down argument,\'94\'92 Alice objected.\
\
\'91When _I_ use a word,\'92 Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, \'91it\
means just what I choose it to mean--neither more nor less.\'92\
\
\'91The question is,\'92 said Alice, \'91whether you CAN make words mean so many\
different things.\'92\
\
\'91The question is,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty, \'91which is to be master--that\'92s\
all.\'92\
\
Alice was too much puzzled to say anything, so after a minute Humpty\
Dumpty began again. \'91They\'92ve a temper, some of them--particularly verbs,\
they\'92re the proudest--adjectives you can do anything with, but not\
verbs--however, _I_ can manage the whole lot of them! Impenetrability!\
That\'92s what _I_ say!\'92\
\
\'91Would you tell me, please,\'92 said Alice \'91what that means?\'92\
\
\'91Now you talk like a reasonable child,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty, looking very\
much pleased. \'91I meant by \'93impenetrability\'94 that we\'92ve had enough of\
that subject, and it would be just as well if you\'92d mention what you\
mean to do next, as I suppose you don\'92t mean to stop here all the rest\
of your life.\'92\
\
\'91That\'92s a great deal to make one word mean,\'92 Alice said in a thoughtful\
tone.\
\
\'91When I make a word do a lot of work like that,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty, \'91I\
always pay it extra.\'92\
\
\'91Oh!\'92 said Alice. She was too much puzzled to make any other remark.\
\
\'91Ah, you should see \'91em come round me of a Saturday night,\'92 Humpty\
Dumpty went on, wagging his head gravely from side to side: \'91for to get\
their wages, you know.\'92\
\
(Alice didn\'92t venture to ask what he paid them with; and so you see I\
can\'92t tell YOU.)\
\
\'91You seem very clever at explaining words, Sir,\'92 said Alice. \'91Would you\
kindly tell me the meaning of the poem called \'93Jabberwocky\'94?\'92\
\
\'91Let\'92s hear it,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty. \'91I can explain all the poems that\
were ever invented--and a good many that haven\'92t been invented just\
yet.\'92\
\
This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated the first verse:\
\
     \'91Twas brillig, and the slithy toves\
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;\
     All mimsy were the borogoves,\
      And the mome raths outgrabe.\
\
\'91That\'92s enough to begin with,\'92 Humpty Dumpty interrupted: \'91there\
are plenty of hard words there. \'93BRILLIG\'94 means four o\'92clock in the\
afternoon--the time when you begin BROILING things for dinner.\'92\
\
\'91That\'92ll do very well,\'92 said Alice: \'91and \'93SLITHY\'94?\'92\
\
\'91Well, \'93SLITHY\'94 means \'93lithe and slimy.\'94 \'93Lithe\'94 is the same as\
\'93active.\'94 You see it\'92s like a portmanteau--there are two meanings packed\
up into one word.\'92\
\
\'91I see it now,\'92 Alice remarked thoughtfully: \'91and what are \'93TOVES\'94?\'92\
\
\'91Well, \'93TOVES\'94 are something like badgers--they\'92re something like\
lizards--and they\'92re something like corkscrews.\'92\
\
\'91They must be very curious looking creatures.\'92\
\
\'91They are that,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty: \'91also they make their nests under\
sun-dials--also they live on cheese.\'92\
\
\'91And what\'92s the \'93GYRE\'94 and to \'93GIMBLE\'94?\'92\
\
\'91To \'93GYRE\'94 is to go round and round like a gyroscope. To \'93GIMBLE\'94 is to\
make holes like a gimlet.\'92\
\
\'91And \'93THE WABE\'94 is the grass-plot round a sun-dial, I suppose?\'92 said\
Alice, surprised at her own ingenuity.\
\
\'91Of course it is. It\'92s called \'93WABE,\'94 you know, because it goes a long\
way before it, and a long way behind it--\'92\
\
\'91And a long way beyond it on each side,\'92 Alice added.\
\
\'91Exactly so. Well, then, \'93MIMSY\'94 is \'93flimsy and miserable\'94 (there\'92s\
another portmanteau for you). And a \'93BOROGOVE\'94 is a thin shabby-looking\
bird with its feathers sticking out all round--something like a live\
mop.\'92\
\
\'91And then \'93MOME RATHS\'94?\'92 said Alice. \'91I\'92m afraid I\'92m giving you a great\
deal of trouble.\'92\
\
\'91Well, a \'93RATH\'94 is a sort of green pig: but \'93MOME\'94 I\'92m not certain\
about. I think it\'92s short for \'93from home\'94--meaning that they\'92d lost\
their way, you know.\'92\
\
\'91And what does \'93OUTGRABE\'94 mean?\'92\
\
\'91Well, \'93OUTGRABING\'94 is something between bellowing and whistling, with a\
kind of sneeze in the middle: however, you\'92ll hear it done, maybe--down\
in the wood yonder--and when you\'92ve once heard it you\'92ll be QUITE\
content. Who\'92s been repeating all that hard stuff to you?\'92\
\
\'91I read it in a book,\'92 said Alice. \'91But I had some poetry repeated to\
me, much easier than that, by--Tweedledee, I think it was.\'92\
\
\'91As to poetry, you know,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty, stretching out one of his\
great hands, \'91_I_ can repeat poetry as well as other folk, if it comes\
to that--\'92\
\
\'91Oh, it needn\'92t come to that!\'92 Alice hastily said, hoping to keep him\
from beginning.\
\
\'91The piece I\'92m going to repeat,\'92 he went on without noticing her remark,\
\'91was written entirely for your amusement.\'92\
\
Alice felt that in that case she really OUGHT to listen to it, so she\
sat down, and said \'91Thank you\'92 rather sadly.\
\
\
     \'91In winter, when the fields are white,\
     I sing this song for your delight--\
\
\
only I don\'92t sing it,\'92 he added, as an explanation.\
\
\'91I see you don\'92t,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91If you can SEE whether I\'92m singing or not, you\'92ve sharper eyes than\
most.\'92 Humpty Dumpty remarked severely. Alice was silent.\
\
\
     \'91In spring, when woods are getting green,\
     I\'92ll try and tell you what I mean.\'92\
\
\
\'91Thank you very much,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\
     \'91In summer, when the days are long,\
     Perhaps you\'92ll understand the song:\
     In autumn, when the leaves are brown,\
     Take pen and ink, and write it down.\'92\
\
\
\'91I will, if I can remember it so long,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91You needn\'92t go on making remarks like that,\'92 Humpty Dumpty said:\
\'91they\'92re not sensible, and they put me out.\'92\
\
     \'91I sent a message to the fish:\
     I told them \'93This is what I wish.\'94\
\
     The little fishes of the sea,\
     They sent an answer back to me.\
\
     The little fishes\'92 answer was\
     \'93We cannot do it, Sir, because--\'93\'92\
\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid I don\'92t quite understand,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91It gets easier further on,\'92 Humpty Dumpty replied.\
\
\
     \'91I sent to them again to say\
     \'93It will be better to obey.\'94\
\
     The fishes answered with a grin,\
     \'93Why, what a temper you are in!\'94\
\
     I told them once, I told them twice:\
     They would not listen to advice.\
\
     I took a kettle large and new,\
     Fit for the deed I had to do.\
\
     My heart went hop, my heart went thump;\
     I filled the kettle at the pump.\
\
     Then some one came to me and said,\
     \'93The little fishes are in bed.\'94\
\
     I said to him, I said it plain,\
     \'93Then you must wake them up again.\'94\
\
     I said it very loud and clear;\
     I went and shouted in his ear.\'92\
\
\
Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to a scream as he repeated this\
verse, and Alice thought with a shudder, \'91I wouldn\'92t have been the\
messenger for ANYTHING!\'92\
\
\
     \'91But he was very stiff and proud;\
     He said \'93You needn\'92t shout so loud!\'94\
\
     And he was very proud and stiff;\
     He said \'93I\'92d go and wake them, if--\'94\
\
     I took a corkscrew from the shelf:\
     I went to wake them up myself.\
\
     And when I found the door was locked,\
     I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.\
\
     And when I found the door was shut,\
     I tried to turn the handle, but--\'92\
\
\
There was a long pause.\
\
\'91Is that all?\'92 Alice timidly asked.\
\
\'91That\'92s all,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty. \'91Good-bye.\'92\
\
This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but, after such a VERY strong\
hint that she ought to be going, she felt that it would hardly be civil\
to stay. So she got up, and held out her hand. \'91Good-bye, till we meet\
again!\'92 she said as cheerfully as she could.\
\
\'91I shouldn\'92t know you again if we DID meet,\'92 Humpty Dumpty replied in\
a discontented tone, giving her one of his fingers to shake; \'91you\'92re so\
exactly like other people.\'92\
\
\'91The face is what one goes by, generally,\'92 Alice remarked in a\
thoughtful tone.\
\
\'91That\'92s just what I complain of,\'92 said Humpty Dumpty. \'91Your face is the\
same as everybody has--the two eyes, so--\'92 (marking their places in the\
air with this thumb) \'91nose in the middle, mouth under. It\'92s always the\
same. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side of the nose, for\
instance--or the mouth at the top--that would be SOME help.\'92\
\
\'91It wouldn\'92t look nice,\'92 Alice objected. But Humpty Dumpty only shut his\
eyes and said \'91Wait till you\'92ve tried.\'92\
\
Alice waited a minute to see if he would speak again, but as he never\
opened his eyes or took any further notice of her, she said \'91Good-bye!\'92\
once more, and, getting no answer to this, she quietly walked away:\
but she couldn\'92t help saying to herself as she went, \'91Of all the\
unsatisfactory--\'92 (she repeated this aloud, as it was a great comfort to\
have such a long word to say) \'91of all the unsatisfactory people I EVER\
met--\'92 She never finished the sentence, for at this moment a heavy crash\
shook the forest from end to end.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER VII. The Lion and the Unicorn\
\
The next moment soldiers came running through the wood, at first in twos\
and threes, then ten or twenty together, and at last in such crowds that\
they seemed to fill the whole forest. Alice got behind a tree, for fear\
of being run over, and watched them go by.\
\
She thought that in all her life she had never seen soldiers so\
uncertain on their feet: they were always tripping over something or\
other, and whenever one went down, several more always fell over him, so\
that the ground was soon covered with little heaps of men.\
\
Then came the horses. Having four feet, these managed rather better than\
the foot-soldiers: but even THEY stumbled now and then; and it seemed\
to be a regular rule that, whenever a horse stumbled the rider fell off\
instantly. The confusion got worse every moment, and Alice was very glad\
to get out of the wood into an open place, where she found the White\
King seated on the ground, busily writing in his memorandum-book.\
\
\'91I\'92ve sent them all!\'92 the King cried in a tone of delight, on seeing\
Alice. \'91Did you happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you came\
through the wood?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, I did,\'92 said Alice: \'91several thousand, I should think.\'92\
\
\'91Four thousand two hundred and seven, that\'92s the exact number,\'92 the King\
said, referring to his book. \'91I couldn\'92t send all the horses, you know,\
because two of them are wanted in the game. And I haven\'92t sent the two\
Messengers, either. They\'92re both gone to the town. Just look along the\
road, and tell me if you can see either of them.\'92\
\
\'91I see nobody on the road,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91I only wish _I_ had such eyes,\'92 the King remarked in a fretful tone.\
\'91To be able to see Nobody! And at that distance, too! Why, it\'92s as much\
as _I_ can do to see real people, by this light!\'92\
\
All this was lost on Alice, who was still looking intently along\
the road, shading her eyes with one hand. \'91I see somebody now!\'92 she\
exclaimed at last. \'91But he\'92s coming very slowly--and what curious\
attitudes he goes into!\'92 (For the messenger kept skipping up and down,\
and wriggling like an eel, as he came along, with his great hands spread\
out like fans on each side.)\
\
\'91Not at all,\'92 said the King. \'91He\'92s an Anglo-Saxon Messenger--and those\
are Anglo-Saxon attitudes. He only does them when he\'92s happy. His name\
is Haigha.\'92 (He pronounced it so as to rhyme with \'91mayor.\'92)\
\
\'91I love my love with an H,\'92 Alice couldn\'92t help beginning, \'91because\
he is Happy. I hate him with an H, because he is Hideous. I fed him\
with--with--with Ham-sandwiches and Hay. His name is Haigha, and he\
lives--\'92\
\
\'91He lives on the Hill,\'92 the King remarked simply, without the least idea\
that he was joining in the game, while Alice was still hesitating for\
the name of a town beginning with H. \'91The other Messenger\'92s called\
Hatta. I must have TWO, you know--to come and go. One to come, and one\
to go.\'92\
\
\'91I beg your pardon?\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91It isn\'92t respectable to beg,\'92 said the King.\
\
\'91I only meant that I didn\'92t understand,\'92 said Alice. \'91Why one to come\
and one to go?\'92\
\
\'91Didn\'92t I tell you?\'92 the King repeated impatiently. \'91I must have Two--to\
fetch and carry. One to fetch, and one to carry.\'92\
\
At this moment the Messenger arrived: he was far too much out of breath\
to say a word, and could only wave his hands about, and make the most\
fearful faces at the poor King.\
\
\'91This young lady loves you with an H,\'92 the King said, introducing Alice\
in the hope of turning off the Messenger\'92s attention from himself--but\
it was no use--the Anglo-Saxon attitudes only got more extraordinary\
every moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from side to side.\
\
\'91You alarm me!\'92 said the King. \'91I feel faint--Give me a ham sandwich!\'92\
\
On which the Messenger, to Alice\'92s great amusement, opened a bag that\
hung round his neck, and handed a sandwich to the King, who devoured it\
greedily.\
\
\'91Another sandwich!\'92 said the King.\
\
\'91There\'92s nothing but hay left now,\'92 the Messenger said, peeping into the\
bag.\
\
\'91Hay, then,\'92 the King murmured in a faint whisper.\
\
Alice was glad to see that it revived him a good deal. \'91There\'92s nothing\
like eating hay when you\'92re faint,\'92 he remarked to her, as he munched\
away.\
\
\'91I should think throwing cold water over you would be better,\'92 Alice\
suggested: \'91or some sal-volatile.\'92\
\
\'91I didn\'92t say there was nothing BETTER,\'92 the King replied. \'91I said there\
was nothing LIKE it.\'92 Which Alice did not venture to deny.\
\
\'91Who did you pass on the road?\'92 the King went on, holding out his hand\
to the Messenger for some more hay.\
\
\'91Nobody,\'92 said the Messenger.\
\
\'91Quite right,\'92 said the King: \'91this young lady saw him too. So of course\
Nobody walks slower than you.\'92\
\
\'91I do my best,\'92 the Messenger said in a sulky tone. \'91I\'92m sure nobody\
walks much faster than I do!\'92\
\
\'91He can\'92t do that,\'92 said the King, \'91or else he\'92d have been here first.\
However, now you\'92ve got your breath, you may tell us what\'92s happened in\
the town.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92ll whisper it,\'92 said the Messenger, putting his hands to his mouth\
in the shape of a trumpet, and stooping so as to get close to the King\'92s\
ear. Alice was sorry for this, as she wanted to hear the news too.\
However, instead of whispering, he simply shouted at the top of his\
voice \'91They\'92re at it again!\'92\
\
\'91Do you call THAT a whisper?\'92 cried the poor King, jumping up and\
shaking himself. \'91If you do such a thing again, I\'92ll have you buttered!\
It went through and through my head like an earthquake!\'92\
\
\'91It would have to be a very tiny earthquake!\'92 thought Alice. \'91Who are at\
it again?\'92 she ventured to ask.\
\
\'91Why the Lion and the Unicorn, of course,\'92 said the King.\
\
\'91Fighting for the crown?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, to be sure,\'92 said the King: \'91and the best of the joke is, that\
it\'92s MY crown all the while! Let\'92s run and see them.\'92 And they trotted\
off, Alice repeating to herself, as she ran, the words of the old\
song:--\
\
\
   \'91The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the crown:\
   The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.\
   Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown;\
   Some gave them plum-cake and drummed them out of town.\'92\
\
\
\'91Does--the one--that wins--get the crown?\'92 she asked, as well as she\
could, for the run was putting her quite out of breath.\
\
\'91Dear me, no!\'92 said the King. \'91What an idea!\'92\
\
\'91Would you--be good enough,\'92 Alice panted out, after running a little\
further, \'91to stop a minute--just to get--one\'92s breath again?\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m GOOD enough,\'92 the King said, \'91only I\'92m not strong enough. You see,\
a minute goes by so fearfully quick. You might as well try to stop a\
Bandersnatch!\'92\
\
Alice had no more breath for talking, so they trotted on in silence,\
till they came in sight of a great crowd, in the middle of which the\
Lion and Unicorn were fighting. They were in such a cloud of dust, that\
at first Alice could not make out which was which: but she soon managed\
to distinguish the Unicorn by his horn.\
\
They placed themselves close to where Hatta, the other messenger, was\
standing watching the fight, with a cup of tea in one hand and a piece\
of bread-and-butter in the other.\
\
\'91He\'92s only just out of prison, and he hadn\'92t finished his tea when\
he was sent in,\'92 Haigha whispered to Alice: \'91and they only give them\
oyster-shells in there--so you see he\'92s very hungry and thirsty. How\
are you, dear child?\'92 he went on, putting his arm affectionately round\
Hatta\'92s neck.\
\
Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his bread and butter.\
\
\'91Were you happy in prison, dear child?\'92 said Haigha.\
\
Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or two trickled down\
his cheek: but not a word would he say.\
\
\'91Speak, can\'92t you!\'92 Haigha cried impatiently. But Hatta only munched\
away, and drank some more tea.\
\
\'91Speak, won\'92t you!\'92 cried the King. \'91How are they getting on with the\
fight?\'92\
\
Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large piece of\
bread-and-butter. \'91They\'92re getting on very well,\'92 he said in a choking\
voice: \'91each of them has been down about eighty-seven times.\'92\
\
\'91Then I suppose they\'92ll soon bring the white bread and the brown?\'92 Alice\
ventured to remark.\
\
\'91It\'92s waiting for \'91em now,\'92 said Hatta: \'91this is a bit of it as I\'92m\
eating.\'92\
\
There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion and the Unicorn\
sat down, panting, while the King called out \'91Ten minutes allowed for\
refreshments!\'92 Haigha and Hatta set to work at once, carrying rough\
trays of white and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was\
VERY dry.\
\
\'91I don\'92t think they\'92ll fight any more to-day,\'92 the King said to Hatta:\
\'91go and order the drums to begin.\'92 And Hatta went bounding away like a\
grasshopper.\
\
For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. Suddenly she\
brightened up. \'91Look, look!\'92 she cried, pointing eagerly. \'91There\'92s the\
White Queen running across the country! She came flying out of the wood\
over yonder--How fast those Queens CAN run!\'92\
\
\'91There\'92s some enemy after her, no doubt,\'92 the King said, without even\
looking round. \'91That wood\'92s full of them.\'92\
\
\'91But aren\'92t you going to run and help her?\'92 Alice asked, very much\
surprised at his taking it so quietly.\
\
\'91No use, no use!\'92 said the King. \'91She runs so fearfully quick. You might\
as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! But I\'92ll make a memorandum about\
her, if you like--She\'92s a dear good creature,\'92 he repeated softly to\
himself, as he opened his memorandum-book. \'91Do you spell \'93creature\'94 with\
a double \'93e\'94?\'92\
\
At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with his hands in his\
pockets. \'91I had the best of it this time?\'92 he said to the King, just\
glancing at him as he passed.\
\
\'91A little--a little,\'92 the King replied, rather nervously. \'91You shouldn\'92t\
have run him through with your horn, you know.\'92\
\
\'91It didn\'92t hurt him,\'92 the Unicorn said carelessly, and he was going\
on, when his eye happened to fall upon Alice: he turned round rather\
instantly, and stood for some time looking at her with an air of the\
deepest disgust.\
\
\'91What--is--this?\'92 he said at last.\
\
\'91This is a child!\'92 Haigha replied eagerly, coming in front of Alice\
to introduce her, and spreading out both his hands towards her in an\
Anglo-Saxon attitude. \'91We only found it to-day. It\'92s as large as life,\
and twice as natural!\'92\
\
\'91I always thought they were fabulous monsters!\'92 said the Unicorn. \'91Is it\
alive?\'92\
\
\'91It can talk,\'92 said Haigha, solemnly.\
\
The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said \'91Talk, child.\'92\
\
Alice could not help her lips curling up into a smile as she began: \'91Do\
you know, I always thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too! I never\
saw one alive before!\'92\
\
\'91Well, now that we HAVE seen each other,\'92 said the Unicorn, \'91if you\'92ll\
believe in me, I\'92ll believe in you. Is that a bargain?\'92\
\
\'91Yes, if you like,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man!\'92 the Unicorn went on, turning\
from her to the King. \'91None of your brown bread for me!\'92\
\
\'91Certainly--certainly!\'92 the King muttered, and beckoned to Haigha. \'91Open\
the bag!\'92 he whispered. \'91Quick! Not that one--that\'92s full of hay!\'92\
\
Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to Alice to hold,\
while he got out a dish and carving-knife. How they all came out of it\
Alice couldn\'92t guess. It was just like a conjuring-trick, she thought.\
\
The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he looked very\
tired and sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. \'91What\'92s this!\'92 he said,\
blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a deep hollow tone that\
sounded like the tolling of a great bell.\
\
\'91Ah, what IS it, now?\'92 the Unicorn cried eagerly. \'91You\'92ll never guess!\
_I_ couldn\'92t.\'92\
\
The Lion looked at Alice wearily. \'91Are you animal--vegetable--or\
mineral?\'92 he said, yawning at every other word.\
\
\'91It\'92s a fabulous monster!\'92 the Unicorn cried out, before Alice could\
reply.\
\
\'91Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster,\'92 the Lion said, lying down and\
putting his chin on his paws. \'91And sit down, both of you,\'92 (to the King\
and the Unicorn): \'91fair play with the cake, you know!\'92\
\
The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having to sit down between\
the two great creatures; but there was no other place for him.\
\
\'91What a fight we might have for the crown, NOW!\'92 the Unicorn said,\
looking slyly up at the crown, which the poor King was nearly shaking\
off his head, he trembled so much.\
\
\'91I should win easy,\'92 said the Lion.\
\
\'91I\'92m not so sure of that,\'92 said the Unicorn.\
\
\'91Why, I beat you all round the town, you chicken!\'92 the Lion replied\
angrily, half getting up as he spoke.\
\
Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel going on: he was very\
nervous, and his voice quite quivered. \'91All round the town?\'92 he\
said. \'91That\'92s a good long way. Did you go by the old bridge, or the\
market-place? You get the best view by the old bridge.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m sure I don\'92t know,\'92 the Lion growled out as he lay down again.\
\'91There was too much dust to see anything. What a time the Monster is,\
cutting up that cake!\'92\
\
Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, with the great\
dish on her knees, and was sawing away diligently with the knife. \'91It\'92s\
very provoking!\'92 she said, in reply to the Lion (she was getting quite\
used to being called \'91the Monster\'92). \'91I\'92ve cut several slices already,\
but they always join on again!\'92\
\
\'91You don\'92t know how to manage Looking-glass cakes,\'92 the Unicorn\
remarked. \'91Hand it round first, and cut it afterwards.\'92\
\
This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got up, and carried the\
dish round, and the cake divided itself into three pieces as she did so.\
\'91NOW cut it up,\'92 said the Lion, as she returned to her place with the\
empty dish.\
\
\'91I say, this isn\'92t fair!\'92 cried the Unicorn, as Alice sat with the knife\
in her hand, very much puzzled how to begin. \'91The Monster has given the\
Lion twice as much as me!\'92\
\
\'91She\'92s kept none for herself, anyhow,\'92 said the Lion. \'91Do you like\
plum-cake, Monster?\'92\
\
But before Alice could answer him, the drums began.\
\
Where the noise came from, she couldn\'92t make out: the air seemed full\
of it, and it rang through and through her head till she felt quite\
deafened. She started to her feet and sprang across the little brook in\
her terror,\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
and had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their feet,\
with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, before she dropped\
to her knees, and put her hands over her ears, vainly trying to shut out\
the dreadful uproar.\
\
\'91If THAT doesn\'92t \'93drum them out of town,\'94\'92 she thought to herself,\
\'91nothing ever will!\'92\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER VIII. \'91It\'92s my own Invention\'92\
\
After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, till all was dead\
silence, and Alice lifted up her head in some alarm. There was no one\
to be seen, and her first thought was that she must have been dreaming\
about the Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-Saxon Messengers.\
However, there was the great dish still lying at her feet, on which she\
had tried to cut the plum-cake, \'91So I wasn\'92t dreaming, after all,\'92 she\
said to herself, \'91unless--unless we\'92re all part of the same dream. Only\
I do hope it\'92s MY dream, and not the Red King\'92s! I don\'92t like belonging\
to another person\'92s dream,\'92 she went on in a rather complaining tone:\
\'91I\'92ve a great mind to go and wake him, and see what happens!\'92\
\
At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a loud shouting of\
\'91Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!\'92 and a Knight dressed in crimson armour came\
galloping down upon her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reached\
her, the horse stopped suddenly: \'91You\'92re my prisoner!\'92 the Knight cried,\
as he tumbled off his horse.\
\
Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him than for herself\
at the moment, and watched him with some anxiety as he mounted again.\
As soon as he was comfortably in the saddle, he began once more \'91You\'92re\
my--\'92 but here another voice broke in \'91Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!\'92 and Alice\
looked round in some surprise for the new enemy.\
\
This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at Alice\'92s side, and tumbled\
off his horse just as the Red Knight had done: then he got on again,\
and the two Knights sat and looked at each other for some time without\
speaking. Alice looked from one to the other in some bewilderment.\
\
\'91She\'92s MY prisoner, you know!\'92 the Red Knight said at last.\
\
\'91Yes, but then _I_ came and rescued her!\'92 the White Knight replied.\
\
\'91Well, we must fight for her, then,\'92 said the Red Knight, as he took up\
his helmet (which hung from the saddle, and was something the shape of a\
horse\'92s head), and put it on.\
\
\'91You will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?\'92 the White Knight\
remarked, putting on his helmet too.\
\
\'91I always do,\'92 said the Red Knight, and they began banging away at each\
other with such fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the way\
of the blows.\
\
\'91I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,\'92 she said to herself, as\
she watched the fight, timidly peeping out from her hiding-place: \'91one\
Rule seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other, he knocks him off\
his horse, and if he misses, he tumbles off himself--and another Rule\
seems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as if they were\
Punch and Judy--What a noise they make when they tumble! Just like\
a whole set of fire-irons falling into the fender! And how quiet the\
horses are! They let them get on and off them just as if they were\
tables!\'92\
\
Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, seemed to be that\
they always fell on their heads, and the battle ended with their both\
falling off in this way, side by side: when they got up again, they\
shook hands, and then the Red Knight mounted and galloped off.\
\
\'91It was a glorious victory, wasn\'92t it?\'92 said the White Knight, as he\
came up panting.\
\
\'91I don\'92t know,\'92 Alice said doubtfully. \'91I don\'92t want to be anybody\'92s\
prisoner. I want to be a Queen.\'92\
\
\'91So you will, when you\'92ve crossed the next brook,\'92 said the White\
Knight. \'91I\'92ll see you safe to the end of the wood--and then I must go\
back, you know. That\'92s the end of my move.\'92\
\
\'91Thank you very much,\'92 said Alice. \'91May I help you off with your\
helmet?\'92 It was evidently more than he could manage by himself; however,\
she managed to shake him out of it at last.\
\
\'91Now one can breathe more easily,\'92 said the Knight, putting back his\
shaggy hair with both hands, and turning his gentle face and large mild\
eyes to Alice. She thought she had never seen such a strange-looking\
soldier in all her life.\
\
He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him very badly, and\
he had a queer-shaped little deal box fastened across his shoulder,\
upside-down, and with the lid hanging open. Alice looked at it with\
great curiosity.\
\
\'91I see you\'92re admiring my little box.\'92 the Knight said in a friendly\
tone. \'91It\'92s my own invention--to keep clothes and sandwiches in. You see\
I carry it upside-down, so that the rain can\'92t get in.\'92\
\
\'91But the things can get OUT,\'92 Alice gently remarked. \'91Do you know the\
lid\'92s open?\'92\
\
\'91I didn\'92t know it,\'92 the Knight said, a shade of vexation passing over\
his face. \'91Then all the things must have fallen out! And the box is no\
use without them.\'92 He unfastened it as he spoke, and was just going to\
throw it into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike him,\
and he hung it carefully on a tree. \'91Can you guess why I did that?\'92 he\
said to Alice.\
\
Alice shook her head.\
\
\'91In hopes some bees may make a nest in it--then I should get the honey.\'92\
\
\'91But you\'92ve got a bee-hive--or something like one--fastened to the\
saddle,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Yes, it\'92s a very good bee-hive,\'92 the Knight said in a discontented\
tone, \'91one of the best kind. But not a single bee has come near it yet.\
And the other thing is a mouse-trap. I suppose the mice keep the bees\
out--or the bees keep the mice out, I don\'92t know which.\'92\
\
\'91I was wondering what the mouse-trap was for,\'92 said Alice. \'91It isn\'92t\
very likely there would be any mice on the horse\'92s back.\'92\
\
\'91Not very likely, perhaps,\'92 said the Knight: \'91but if they DO come, I\
don\'92t choose to have them running all about.\'92\
\
\'91You see,\'92 he went on after a pause, \'91it\'92s as well to be provided for\
EVERYTHING. That\'92s the reason the horse has all those anklets round his\
feet.\'92\
\
\'91But what are they for?\'92 Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.\
\
\'91To guard against the bites of sharks,\'92 the Knight replied. \'91It\'92s an\
invention of my own. And now help me on. I\'92ll go with you to the end of\
the wood--What\'92s the dish for?\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s meant for plum-cake,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91We\'92d better take it with us,\'92 the Knight said. \'91It\'92ll come in handy if\
we find any plum-cake. Help me to get it into this bag.\'92\
\
This took a very long time to manage, though Alice held the bag open\
very carefully, because the Knight was so VERY awkward in putting in\
the dish: the first two or three times that he tried he fell in himself\
instead. \'91It\'92s rather a tight fit, you see,\'92 he said, as they got it in\
a last; \'91There are so many candlesticks in the bag.\'92 And he hung it\
to the saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of carrots, and\
fire-irons, and many other things.\
\
\'91I hope you\'92ve got your hair well fastened on?\'92 he continued, as they\
set off.\
\
\'91Only in the usual way,\'92 Alice said, smiling.\
\
\'91That\'92s hardly enough,\'92 he said, anxiously. \'91You see the wind is so VERY\
strong here. It\'92s as strong as soup.\'92\
\
\'91Have you invented a plan for keeping the hair from being blown off?\'92\
Alice enquired.\
\
\'91Not yet,\'92 said the Knight. \'91But I\'92ve got a plan for keeping it from\
FALLING off.\'92\
\
\'91I should like to hear it, very much.\'92\
\
\'91First you take an upright stick,\'92 said the Knight. \'91Then you make your\
hair creep up it, like a fruit-tree. Now the reason hair falls off is\
because it hangs DOWN--things never fall UPWARDS, you know. It\'92s a plan\
of my own invention. You may try it if you like.\'92\
\
It didn\'92t sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and for a few minutes\
she walked on in silence, puzzling over the idea, and every now and then\
stopping to help the poor Knight, who certainly was NOT a good rider.\
\
Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), he fell off in\
front; and whenever it went on again (which it generally did rather\
suddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, except\
that he had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and as he\
generally did this on the side on which Alice was walking, she soon\
found that it was the best plan not to walk QUITE close to the horse.\
\
\'91I\'92m afraid you\'92ve not had much practice in riding,\'92 she ventured to\
say, as she was helping him up from his fifth tumble.\
\
The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little offended at the\
remark. \'91What makes you say that?\'92 he asked, as he scrambled back into\
the saddle, keeping hold of Alice\'92s hair with one hand, to save himself\
from falling over on the other side.\
\
\'91Because people don\'92t fall off quite so often, when they\'92ve had much\
practice.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92ve had plenty of practice,\'92 the Knight said very gravely: \'91plenty of\
practice!\'92\
\
Alice could think of nothing better to say than \'91Indeed?\'92 but she said\
it as heartily as she could. They went on a little way in silence after\
this, the Knight with his eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alice\
watching anxiously for the next tumble.\
\
\'91The great art of riding,\'92 the Knight suddenly began in a loud voice,\
waving his right arm as he spoke, \'91is to keep--\'92 Here the sentence ended\
as suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top of\
his head exactly in the path where Alice was walking. She was quite\
frightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as she picked him up,\
\'91I hope no bones are broken?\'92\
\
\'91None to speak of,\'92 the Knight said, as if he didn\'92t mind breaking two\
or three of them. \'91The great art of riding, as I was saying, is--to keep\
your balance properly. Like this, you know--\'92\
\
He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to show Alice\
what he meant, and this time he fell flat on his back, right under the\
horse\'92s feet.\
\
\'91Plenty of practice!\'92 he went on repeating, all the time that Alice was\
getting him on his feet again. \'91Plenty of practice!\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s too ridiculous!\'92 cried Alice, losing all her patience this time.\
\'91You ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, that you ought!\'92\
\
\'91Does that kind go smoothly?\'92 the Knight asked in a tone of great\
interest, clasping his arms round the horse\'92s neck as he spoke, just in\
time to save himself from tumbling off again.\
\
\'91Much more smoothly than a live horse,\'92 Alice said, with a little scream\
of laughter, in spite of all she could do to prevent it.\
\
\'91I\'92ll get one,\'92 the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. \'91One or\
two--several.\'92\
\
There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight went on again.\
\'91I\'92m a great hand at inventing things. Now, I daresay you noticed, that\
last time you picked me up, that I was looking rather thoughtful?\'92\
\
\'91You WERE a little grave,\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91Well, just then I was inventing a new way of getting over a gate--would\
you like to hear it?\'92\
\
\'91Very much indeed,\'92 Alice said politely.\
\
\'91I\'92ll tell you how I came to think of it,\'92 said the Knight. \'91You see, I\
said to myself, \'93The only difficulty is with the feet: the HEAD is high\
enough already.\'94 Now, first I put my head on the top of the gate--then I\
stand on my head--then the feet are high enough, you see--then I\'92m over,\
you see.\'92\
\
\'91Yes, I suppose you\'92d be over when that was done,\'92 Alice said\
thoughtfully: \'91but don\'92t you think it would be rather hard?\'92\
\
\'91I haven\'92t tried it yet,\'92 the Knight said, gravely: \'91so I can\'92t tell for\
certain--but I\'92m afraid it WOULD be a little hard.\'92\
\
He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the subject hastily.\
\'91What a curious helmet you\'92ve got!\'92 she said cheerfully. \'91Is that your\
invention too?\'92\
\
The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet, which hung from the\
saddle. \'91Yes,\'92 he said, \'91but I\'92ve invented a better one than that--like\
a sugar loaf. When I used to wear it, if I fell off the horse, it always\
touched the ground directly. So I had a VERY little way to fall, you\
see--But there WAS the danger of falling INTO it, to be sure. That\
happened to me once--and the worst of it was, before I could get out\
again, the other White Knight came and put it on. He thought it was his\
own helmet.\'92\
\
The knight looked so solemn about it that Alice did not dare to laugh.\
\'91I\'92m afraid you must have hurt him,\'92 she said in a trembling voice,\
\'91being on the top of his head.\'92\
\
\'91I had to kick him, of course,\'92 the Knight said, very seriously. \'91And\
then he took the helmet off again--but it took hours and hours to get me\
out. I was as fast as--as lightning, you know.\'92\
\
\'91But that\'92s a different kind of fastness,\'92 Alice objected.\
\
The Knight shook his head. \'91It was all kinds of fastness with me, I can\
assure you!\'92 he said. He raised his hands in some excitement as he said\
this, and instantly rolled out of the saddle, and fell headlong into a\
deep ditch.\
\
Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for him. She was rather\
startled by the fall, as for some time he had kept on very well, and she\
was afraid that he really WAS hurt this time. However, though she could\
see nothing but the soles of his feet, she was much relieved to hear\
that he was talking on in his usual tone. \'91All kinds of fastness,\'92\
he repeated: \'91but it was careless of him to put another man\'92s helmet\
on--with the man in it, too.\'92\
\
\'91How CAN you go on talking so quietly, head downwards?\'92 Alice asked, as\
she dragged him out by the feet, and laid him in a heap on the bank.\
\
The Knight looked surprised at the question. \'91What does it matter where\
my body happens to be?\'92 he said. \'91My mind goes on working all the same.\
In fact, the more head downwards I am, the more I keep inventing new\
things.\'92\
\
\'91Now the cleverest thing of the sort that I ever did,\'92 he went on after\
a pause, \'91was inventing a new pudding during the meat-course.\'92\
\
\'91In time to have it cooked for the next course?\'92 said Alice. \'91Well,\
not the NEXT course,\'92 the Knight said in a slow thoughtful tone: \'91no,\
certainly not the next COURSE.\'92\
\
\'91Then it would have to be the next day. I suppose you wouldn\'92t have two\
pudding-courses in one dinner?\'92\
\
\'91Well, not the NEXT day,\'92 the Knight repeated as before: \'91not the next\
DAY. In fact,\'92 he went on, holding his head down, and his voice getting\
lower and lower, \'91I don\'92t believe that pudding ever WAS cooked! In fact,\
I don\'92t believe that pudding ever WILL be cooked! And yet it was a very\
clever pudding to invent.\'92\
\
\'91What did you mean it to be made of?\'92 Alice asked, hoping to cheer him\
up, for the poor Knight seemed quite low-spirited about it.\
\
\'91It began with blotting paper,\'92 the Knight answered with a groan.\
\
\'91That wouldn\'92t be very nice, I\'92m afraid--\'92\
\
\'91Not very nice ALONE,\'92 he interrupted, quite eagerly: \'91but you\'92ve no\
idea what a difference it makes mixing it with other things--such as\
gunpowder and sealing-wax. And here I must leave you.\'92 They had just\
come to the end of the wood.\
\
Alice could only look puzzled: she was thinking of the pudding.\
\
\'91You are sad,\'92 the Knight said in an anxious tone: \'91let me sing you a\
song to comfort you.\'92\
\
\'91Is it very long?\'92 Alice asked, for she had heard a good deal of poetry\
that day.\
\
\'91It\'92s long,\'92 said the Knight, \'91but very, VERY beautiful. Everybody that\
hears me sing it--either it brings the TEARS into their eyes, or else--\'92\
\
\'91Or else what?\'92 said Alice, for the Knight had made a sudden pause.\
\
\'91Or else it doesn\'92t, you know. The name of the song is called \'93HADDOCKS\'92\
EYES.\'94\'92\
\
\'91Oh, that\'92s the name of the song, is it?\'92 Alice said, trying to feel\
interested.\
\
\'91No, you don\'92t understand,\'92 the Knight said, looking a little vexed.\
\'91That\'92s what the name is CALLED. The name really IS \'93THE AGED AGED\
MAN.\'94\'92\
\
\'91Then I ought to have said \'93That\'92s what the SONG is called\'94?\'92 Alice\
corrected herself.\
\
\'91No, you oughtn\'92t: that\'92s quite another thing! The SONG is called \'93WAYS\
AND MEANS\'94: but that\'92s only what it\'92s CALLED, you know!\'92\
\
\'91Well, what IS the song, then?\'92 said Alice, who was by this time\
completely bewildered.\
\
\'91I was coming to that,\'92 the Knight said. \'91The song really IS \'93A-SITTING\
ON A GATE\'94: and the tune\'92s my own invention.\'92\
\
So saying, he stopped his horse and let the reins fall on its neck:\
then, slowly beating time with one hand, and with a faint smile lighting\
up his gentle foolish face, as if he enjoyed the music of his song, he\
began.\
\
Of all the strange things that Alice saw in her journey Through The\
Looking-Glass, this was the one that she always remembered most clearly.\
Years afterwards she could bring the whole scene back again, as if it\
had been only yesterday--the mild blue eyes and kindly smile of the\
Knight--the setting sun gleaming through his hair, and shining on his\
armour in a blaze of light that quite dazzled her--the horse quietly\
moving about, with the reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping the\
grass at her feet--and the black shadows of the forest behind--all this\
she took in like a picture, as, with one hand shading her eyes, she\
leant against a tree, watching the strange pair, and listening, in a\
half dream, to the melancholy music of the song.\
\
\'91But the tune ISN\'92T his own invention,\'92 she said to herself: \'91it\'92s \'93I\
GIVE THEE ALL, I CAN NO MORE.\'94\'92 She stood and listened very attentively,\
but no tears came into her eyes.\
\
\
     \'91I\'92ll tell thee everything I can;\
      There\'92s little to relate.\
     I saw an aged aged man,\
      A-sitting on a gate.\
     \'93Who are you, aged man?\'94 I said,\
      \'93and how is it you live?\'94\
      And his answer trickled through my head\
      Like water through a sieve.\
\
     He said \'93I look for butterflies\
      That sleep among the wheat:\
     I make them into mutton-pies,\
      And sell them in the street.\
     I sell them unto men,\'94 he said,\
      \'93Who sail on stormy seas;\
     And that\'92s the way I get my bread--\
      A trifle, if you please.\'94\
\
     But I was thinking of a plan\
      To dye one\'92s whiskers green,\
     And always use so large a fan\
      That they could not be seen.\
     So, having no reply to give\
      To what the old man said,\
     I cried, \'93Come, tell me how you live!\'94\
       And thumped him on the head.\
\
     His accents mild took up the tale:\
      He said \'93I go my ways,\
     And when I find a mountain-rill,\
      I set it in a blaze;\
     And thence they make a stuff they call\
      Rolands\'92 Macassar Oil--\
     Yet twopence-halfpenny is all\
      They give me for my toil.\'94\
\
     But I was thinking of a way\
      To feed oneself on batter,\
     And so go on from day to day\
      Getting a little fatter.\
     I shook him well from side to side,\
      Until his face was blue:\
     \'93Come, tell me how you live,\'94 I cried,\
      \'93And what it is you do!\'94\
\
     He said \'93I hunt for haddocks\'92 eyes\
      Among the heather bright,\
     And work them into waistcoat-buttons\
      In the silent night.\
     And these I do not sell for gold\
      Or coin of silvery shine\
     But for a copper halfpenny,\
      And that will purchase nine.\
\
     \'93I sometimes dig for buttered rolls,\
      Or set limed twigs for crabs;\
     I sometimes search the grassy knolls\
      For wheels of Hansom-cabs.\
     And that\'92s the way\'94 (he gave a wink)\
      \'93By which I get my wealth--\
     And very gladly will I drink\
      Your Honour\'92s noble health.\'94\
\
     I heard him then, for I had just\
      Completed my design\
     To keep the Menai bridge from rust\
      By boiling it in wine.\
     I thanked him much for telling me\
      The way he got his wealth,\
     But chiefly for his wish that he\
      Might drink my noble health.\
\
     And now, if e\'92er by chance I put\
      My fingers into glue\
     Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot\
      Into a left-hand shoe,\
     Or if I drop upon my toe\
      A very heavy weight,\
     I weep, for it reminds me so,\
      Of that old man I used to know--\
\
     Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow,\
     Whose hair was whiter than the snow,\
     Whose face was very like a crow,\
     With eyes, like cinders, all aglow,\
     Who seemed distracted with his woe,\
     Who rocked his body to and fro,\
     And muttered mumblingly and low,\
     As if his mouth were full of dough,\
     Who snorted like a buffalo--\
     That summer evening, long ago,\
      A-sitting on a gate.\'92\
\
\
As the Knight sang the last words of the ballad, he gathered up the\
reins, and turned his horse\'92s head along the road by which they had\
come. \'91You\'92ve only a few yards to go,\'92 he said, \'91down the hill and over\
that little brook, and then you\'92ll be a Queen--But you\'92ll stay and\
see me off first?\'92 he added as Alice turned with an eager look in the\
direction to which he pointed. \'91I shan\'92t be long. You\'92ll wait and wave\
your handkerchief when I get to that turn in the road? I think it\'92ll\
encourage me, you see.\'92\
\
\'91Of course I\'92ll wait,\'92 said Alice: \'91and thank you very much for coming\
so far--and for the song--I liked it very much.\'92\
\
\'91I hope so,\'92 the Knight said doubtfully: \'91but you didn\'92t cry so much as\
I thought you would.\'92\
\
So they shook hands, and then the Knight rode slowly away into the\
forest. \'91It won\'92t take long to see him OFF, I expect,\'92 Alice said to\
herself, as she stood watching him. \'91There he goes! Right on his head as\
usual! However, he gets on again pretty easily--that comes of having so\
many things hung round the horse--\'92 So she went on talking to herself,\
as she watched the horse walking leisurely along the road, and the\
Knight tumbling off, first on one side and then on the other. After\
the fourth or fifth tumble he reached the turn, and then she waved her\
handkerchief to him, and waited till he was out of sight.\
\
\'91I hope it encouraged him,\'92 she said, as she turned to run down the\
hill: \'91and now for the last brook, and to be a Queen! How grand it\
sounds!\'92 A very few steps brought her to the edge of the brook. \'91The\
Eighth Square at last!\'92 she cried as she bounded across,\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
  *    *    *    *    *    *    *\
\
and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as soft as moss, with little\
flower-beds dotted about it here and there. \'91Oh, how glad I am to get\
here! And what IS this on my head?\'92 she exclaimed in a tone of dismay,\
as she put her hands up to something very heavy, and fitted tight all\
round her head.\
\
\'91But how CAN it have got there without my knowing it?\'92 she said to\
herself, as she lifted it off, and set it on her lap to make out what it\
could possibly be.\
\
It was a golden crown.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER IX. Queen Alice\
\
\'91Well, this IS grand!\'92 said Alice. \'91I never expected I should be a Queen\
so soon--and I\'92ll tell you what it is, your majesty,\'92 she went on in\
a severe tone (she was always rather fond of scolding herself), \'91it\'92ll\
never do for you to be lolling about on the grass like that! Queens have\
to be dignified, you know!\'92\
\
So she got up and walked about--rather stiffly just at first, as she was\
afraid that the crown might come off: but she comforted herself with the\
thought that there was nobody to see her, \'91and if I really am a Queen,\'92\
she said as she sat down again, \'91I shall be able to manage it quite well\
in time.\'92\
\
Everything was happening so oddly that she didn\'92t feel a bit surprised\
at finding the Red Queen and the White Queen sitting close to her, one\
on each side: she would have liked very much to ask them how they came\
there, but she feared it would not be quite civil. However, there would\
be no harm, she thought, in asking if the game was over. \'91Please, would\
you tell me--\'92 she began, looking timidly at the Red Queen.\
\
\'91Speak when you\'92re spoken to!\'92 The Queen sharply interrupted her.\
\
\'91But if everybody obeyed that rule,\'92 said Alice, who was always ready\
for a little argument, \'91and if you only spoke when you were spoken to,\
and the other person always waited for YOU to begin, you see nobody\
would ever say anything, so that--\'92\
\
\'91Ridiculous!\'92 cried the Queen. \'91Why, don\'92t you see, child--\'92 here she\
broke off with a frown, and, after thinking for a minute, suddenly\
changed the subject of the conversation. \'91What do you mean by \'93If you\
really are a Queen\'94? What right have you to call yourself so? You can\'92t\
be a Queen, you know, till you\'92ve passed the proper examination. And the\
sooner we begin it, the better.\'92\
\
\'91I only said \'93if\'94!\'92 poor Alice pleaded in a piteous tone.\
\
The two Queens looked at each other, and the Red Queen remarked, with a\
little shudder, \'91She SAYS she only said \'93if\'94--\'92\
\
\'91But she said a great deal more than that!\'92 the White Queen moaned,\
wringing her hands. \'91Oh, ever so much more than that!\'92\
\
\'91So you did, you know,\'92 the Red Queen said to Alice. \'91Always speak the\
truth--think before you speak--and write it down afterwards.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92m sure I didn\'92t mean--\'92 Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen\
interrupted her impatiently.\
\
\'91That\'92s just what I complain of! You SHOULD have meant! What do you\
suppose is the use of child without any meaning? Even a joke should\
have some meaning--and a child\'92s more important than a joke, I hope. You\
couldn\'92t deny that, even if you tried with both hands.\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t deny things with my HANDS,\'92 Alice objected.\
\
\'91Nobody said you did,\'92 said the Red Queen. \'91I said you couldn\'92t if you\
tried.\'92\
\
\'91She\'92s in that state of mind,\'92 said the White Queen, \'91that she wants to\
deny SOMETHING--only she doesn\'92t know what to deny!\'92\
\
\'91A nasty, vicious temper,\'92 the Red Queen remarked; and then there was an\
uncomfortable silence for a minute or two.\
\
The Red Queen broke the silence by saying to the White Queen, \'91I invite\
you to Alice\'92s dinner-party this afternoon.\'92\
\
The White Queen smiled feebly, and said \'91And I invite YOU.\'92\
\
\'91I didn\'92t know I was to have a party at all,\'92 said Alice; \'91but if there\
is to be one, I think _I_ ought to invite the guests.\'92\
\
\'91We gave you the opportunity of doing it,\'92 the Red Queen remarked: \'91but\
I daresay you\'92ve not had many lessons in manners yet?\'92\
\
\'91Manners are not taught in lessons,\'92 said Alice. \'91Lessons teach you to\
do sums, and things of that sort.\'92\
\
\'91And you do Addition?\'92 the White Queen asked. \'91What\'92s one and one and\
one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one?\'92\
\
\'91I don\'92t know,\'92 said Alice. \'91I lost count.\'92\
\
\'91She can\'92t do Addition,\'92 the Red Queen interrupted. \'91Can you do\
Subtraction? Take nine from eight.\'92\
\
\'91Nine from eight I can\'92t, you know,\'92 Alice replied very readily: \'91but--\'92\
\
\'91She can\'92t do Subtraction,\'92 said the White Queen. \'91Can you do Division?\
Divide a loaf by a knife--what\'92s the answer to that?\'92\
\
\'91I suppose--\'92 Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen answered for her.\
\'91Bread-and-butter, of course. Try another Subtraction sum. Take a bone\
from a dog: what remains?\'92\
\
Alice considered. \'91The bone wouldn\'92t remain, of course, if I took\
it--and the dog wouldn\'92t remain; it would come to bite me--and I\'92m sure\
I shouldn\'92t remain!\'92\
\
\'91Then you think nothing would remain?\'92 said the Red Queen.\
\
\'91I think that\'92s the answer.\'92\
\
\'91Wrong, as usual,\'92 said the Red Queen: \'91the dog\'92s temper would remain.\'92\
\
\'91But I don\'92t see how--\'92\
\
\'91Why, look here!\'92 the Red Queen cried. \'91The dog would lose its temper,\
wouldn\'92t it?\'92\
\
\'91Perhaps it would,\'92 Alice replied cautiously.\
\
\'91Then if the dog went away, its temper would remain!\'92 the Queen\
exclaimed triumphantly.\
\
Alice said, as gravely as she could, \'91They might go different ways.\'92 But\
she couldn\'92t help thinking to herself, \'91What dreadful nonsense we ARE\
talking!\'92\
\
\'91She can\'92t do sums a BIT!\'92 the Queens said together, with great\
emphasis.\
\
\'91Can YOU do sums?\'92 Alice said, turning suddenly on the White Queen, for\
she didn\'92t like being found fault with so much.\
\
The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. \'91I can do Addition, if you give me\
time--but I can\'92t do Subtraction, under ANY circumstances!\'92\
\
\'91Of course you know your A B C?\'92 said the Red Queen.\
\
\'91To be sure I do.\'92 said Alice.\
\
\'91So do I,\'92 the White Queen whispered: \'91we\'92ll often say it over together,\
dear. And I\'92ll tell you a secret--I can read words of one letter! Isn\'92t\
THAT grand! However, don\'92t be discouraged. You\'92ll come to it in time.\'92\
\
Here the Red Queen began again. \'91Can you answer useful questions?\'92 she\
said. \'91How is bread made?\'92\
\
\'91I know THAT!\'92 Alice cried eagerly. \'91You take some flour--\'92\
\
\'91Where do you pick the flower?\'92 the White Queen asked. \'91In a garden, or\
in the hedges?\'92\
\
\'91Well, it isn\'92t PICKED at all,\'92 Alice explained: \'91it\'92s GROUND--\'92\
\
\'91How many acres of ground?\'92 said the White Queen. \'91You mustn\'92t leave out\
so many things.\'92\
\
\'91Fan her head!\'92 the Red Queen anxiously interrupted. \'91She\'92ll be feverish\
after so much thinking.\'92 So they set to work and fanned her with bunches\
of leaves, till she had to beg them to leave off, it blew her hair about\
so.\
\
\'91She\'92s all right again now,\'92 said the Red Queen. \'91Do you know Languages?\
What\'92s the French for fiddle-de-dee?\'92\
\
\'91Fiddle-de-dee\'92s not English,\'92 Alice replied gravely.\
\
\'91Who ever said it was?\'92 said the Red Queen.\
\
Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty this time. \'91If you\'92ll\
tell me what language \'93fiddle-de-dee\'94 is, I\'92ll tell you the French for\
it!\'92 she exclaimed triumphantly.\
\
But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and said \'91Queens never\
make bargains.\'92\
\
\'91I wish Queens never asked questions,\'92 Alice thought to herself.\
\
\'91Don\'92t let us quarrel,\'92 the White Queen said in an anxious tone. \'91What\
is the cause of lightning?\'92\
\
\'91The cause of lightning,\'92 Alice said very decidedly, for she felt quite\
certain about this, \'91is the thunder--no, no!\'92 she hastily corrected\
herself. \'91I meant the other way.\'92\
\
\'91It\'92s too late to correct it,\'92 said the Red Queen: \'91when you\'92ve once\
said a thing, that fixes it, and you must take the consequences.\'92\
\
\'91Which reminds me--\'92 the White Queen said, looking down and nervously\
clasping and unclasping her hands, \'91we had SUCH a thunderstorm last\
Tuesday--I mean one of the last set of Tuesdays, you know.\'92\
\
Alice was puzzled. \'91In OUR country,\'92 she remarked, \'91there\'92s only one day\
at a time.\'92\
\
The Red Queen said, \'91That\'92s a poor thin way of doing things. Now HERE,\
we mostly have days and nights two or three at a time, and sometimes\
in the winter we take as many as five nights together--for warmth, you\
know.\'92\
\
\'91Are five nights warmer than one night, then?\'92 Alice ventured to ask.\
\
\'91Five times as warm, of course.\'92\
\
\'91But they should be five times as COLD, by the same rule--\'92\
\
\'91Just so!\'92 cried the Red Queen. \'91Five times as warm, AND five times\
as cold--just as I\'92m five times as rich as you are, AND five times as\
clever!\'92\
\
Alice sighed and gave it up. \'91It\'92s exactly like a riddle with no\
answer!\'92 she thought.\
\
\'91Humpty Dumpty saw it too,\'92 the White Queen went on in a low voice, more\
as if she were talking to herself. \'91He came to the door with a corkscrew\
in his hand--\'92\
\
\'91What did he want?\'92 said the Red Queen.\
\
\'91He said he WOULD come in,\'92 the White Queen went on, \'91because he was\
looking for a hippopotamus. Now, as it happened, there wasn\'92t such a\
thing in the house, that morning.\'92\
\
\'91Is there generally?\'92 Alice asked in an astonished tone.\
\
\'91Well, only on Thursdays,\'92 said the Queen.\
\
\'91I know what he came for,\'92 said Alice: \'91he wanted to punish the fish,\
because--\'92\
\
Here the White Queen began again. \'91It was SUCH a thunderstorm, you can\'92t\
think!\'92 (\'91She NEVER could, you know,\'92 said the Red Queen.) \'91And part of\
the roof came off, and ever so much thunder got in--and it went\
rolling round the room in great lumps--and knocking over the tables and\
things--till I was so frightened, I couldn\'92t remember my own name!\'92\
\
Alice thought to herself, \'91I never should TRY to remember my name in the\
middle of an accident! Where would be the use of it?\'92 but she did not\
say this aloud, for fear of hurting the poor Queen\'92s feeling.\
\
\'91Your Majesty must excuse her,\'92 the Red Queen said to Alice, taking\
one of the White Queen\'92s hands in her own, and gently stroking it:\
\'91she means well, but she can\'92t help saying foolish things, as a general\
rule.\'92\
\
The White Queen looked timidly at Alice, who felt she OUGHT to say\
something kind, but really couldn\'92t think of anything at the moment.\
\
\'91She never was really well brought up,\'92 the Red Queen went on: \'91but\
it\'92s amazing how good-tempered she is! Pat her on the head, and see how\
pleased she\'92ll be!\'92 But this was more than Alice had courage to do.\
\
\'91A little kindness--and putting her hair in papers--would do wonders\
with her--\'92\
\
The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid her head on Alice\'92s shoulder.\
\'91I AM so sleepy?\'92 she moaned.\
\
\'91She\'92s tired, poor thing!\'92 said the Red Queen. \'91Smooth her hair--lend\
her your nightcap--and sing her a soothing lullaby.\'92\
\
\'91I haven\'92t got a nightcap with me,\'92 said Alice, as she tried to obey the\
first direction: \'91and I don\'92t know any soothing lullabies.\'92\
\
\'91I must do it myself, then,\'92 said the Red Queen, and she began:\
\
\
   \'91Hush-a-by lady, in Alice\'92s lap!\
   Till the feast\'92s ready, we\'92ve time for a nap:\
   When the feast\'92s over, we\'92ll go to the ball--\
   Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!\
\
\
\'91And now you know the words,\'92 she added, as she put her head down on\
Alice\'92s other shoulder, \'91just sing it through to ME. I\'92m getting sleepy,\
too.\'92 In another moment both Queens were fast asleep, and snoring loud.\
\
\'91What AM I to do?\'92 exclaimed Alice, looking about in great perplexity,\
as first one round head, and then the other, rolled down from her\
shoulder, and lay like a heavy lump in her lap. \'91I don\'92t think it EVER\
happened before, that any one had to take care of two Queens asleep\
at once! No, not in all the History of England--it couldn\'92t, you know,\
because there never was more than one Queen at a time. Do wake up, you\
heavy things!\'92 she went on in an impatient tone; but there was no answer\
but a gentle snoring.\
\
The snoring got more distinct every minute, and sounded more like a\
tune: at last she could even make out the words, and she listened so\
eagerly that, when the two great heads vanished from her lap, she hardly\
missed them.\
\
She was standing before an arched doorway over which were the words\
QUEEN ALICE in large letters, and on each side of the arch there was a\
bell-handle; one was marked \'91Visitors\'92 Bell,\'92 and the other \'91Servants\'92\
Bell.\'92\
\
\'91I\'92ll wait till the song\'92s over,\'92 thought Alice, \'91and then I\'92ll\
ring--the--WHICH bell must I ring?\'92 she went on, very much puzzled by\
the names. \'91I\'92m not a visitor, and I\'92m not a servant. There OUGHT to be\
one marked \'93Queen,\'94 you know--\'92\
\
Just then the door opened a little way, and a creature with a long beak\
put its head out for a moment and said \'91No admittance till the week\
after next!\'92 and shut the door again with a bang.\
\
Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long time, but at last, a very old\
Frog, who was sitting under a tree, got up and hobbled slowly towards\
her: he was dressed in bright yellow, and had enormous boots on.\
\
\'91What is it, now?\'92 the Frog said in a deep hoarse whisper.\
\
Alice turned round, ready to find fault with anybody. \'91Where\'92s the\
servant whose business it is to answer the door?\'92 she began angrily.\
\
\'91Which door?\'92 said the Frog.\
\
Alice almost stamped with irritation at the slow drawl in which he\
spoke. \'91THIS door, of course!\'92\
\
The Frog looked at the door with his large dull eyes for a minute:\
then he went nearer and rubbed it with his thumb, as if he were trying\
whether the paint would come off; then he looked at Alice.\
\
\'91To answer the door?\'92 he said. \'91What\'92s it been asking of?\'92 He was so\
hoarse that Alice could scarcely hear him.\
\
\'91I don\'92t know what you mean,\'92 she said.\
\
\'91I talks English, doesn\'92t I?\'92 the Frog went on. \'91Or are you deaf? What\
did it ask you?\'92\
\
\'91Nothing!\'92 Alice said impatiently. \'91I\'92ve been knocking at it!\'92\
\
\'91Shouldn\'92t do that--shouldn\'92t do that--\'92 the Frog muttered. \'91Vexes it,\
you know.\'92 Then he went up and gave the door a kick with one of his\
great feet. \'91You let IT alone,\'92 he panted out, as he hobbled back to his\
tree, \'91and it\'92ll let YOU alone, you know.\'92\
\
At this moment the door was flung open, and a shrill voice was heard\
singing:\
\
\
   \'91To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said,\
   \'93I\'92ve a sceptre in hand, I\'92ve a crown on my head;\
   Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be,\
   Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me.\'94\'92\
\
\
And hundreds of voices joined in the chorus:\
\
\
  \'91Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can,\
  And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran:\
  Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea--\
  And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three!\'92\
\
\
Then followed a confused noise of cheering, and Alice thought to\
herself, \'91Thirty times three makes ninety. I wonder if any one\'92s\
counting?\'92 In a minute there was silence again, and the same shrill\
voice sang another verse;\
\
\
  \'91\'93O Looking-Glass creatures,\'94 quoth Alice, \'93draw near!\
  \'91Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear:\
  \'91Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea\
  Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!\'94\'92\
\
\
Then came the chorus again:--\
\
\
  \'91Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,\
  Or anything else that is pleasant to drink:\
  Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine--\
  And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!\'92\
\
\
\'91Ninety times nine!\'92 Alice repeated in despair, \'91Oh, that\'92ll never\
be done! I\'92d better go in at once--\'92 and there was a dead silence the\
moment she appeared.\
\
Alice glanced nervously along the table, as she walked up the large\
hall, and noticed that there were about fifty guests, of all kinds: some\
were animals, some birds, and there were even a few flowers among them.\
\'91I\'92m glad they\'92ve come without waiting to be asked,\'92 she thought: \'91I\
should never have known who were the right people to invite!\'92\
\
There were three chairs at the head of the table; the Red and White\
Queens had already taken two of them, but the middle one was empty.\
Alice sat down in it, rather uncomfortable in the silence, and longing\
for some one to speak.\
\
At last the Red Queen began. \'91You\'92ve missed the soup and fish,\'92 she\
said. \'91Put on the joint!\'92 And the waiters set a leg of mutton before\
Alice, who looked at it rather anxiously, as she had never had to carve\
a joint before.\
\
\'91You look a little shy; let me introduce you to that leg of mutton,\'92\
said the Red Queen. \'91Alice--Mutton; Mutton--Alice.\'92 The leg of mutton\
got up in the dish and made a little bow to Alice; and Alice returned\
the bow, not knowing whether to be frightened or amused.\
\
\'91May I give you a slice?\'92 she said, taking up the knife and fork, and\
looking from one Queen to the other.\
\
\'91Certainly not,\'92 the Red Queen said, very decidedly: \'91it isn\'92t etiquette\
to cut any one you\'92ve been introduced to. Remove the joint!\'92 And the\
waiters carried it off, and brought a large plum-pudding in its place.\
\
\'91I won\'92t be introduced to the pudding, please,\'92 Alice said rather\
hastily, \'91or we shall get no dinner at all. May I give you some?\'92\
\
But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled \'91Pudding--Alice;\
Alice--Pudding. Remove the pudding!\'92 and the waiters took it away so\
quickly that Alice couldn\'92t return its bow.\
\
However, she didn\'92t see why the Red Queen should be the only one to give\
orders, so, as an experiment, she called out \'91Waiter! Bring back the\
pudding!\'92 and there it was again in a moment like a conjuring-trick. It\
was so large that she couldn\'92t help feeling a LITTLE shy with it, as she\
had been with the mutton; however, she conquered her shyness by a great\
effort and cut a slice and handed it to the Red Queen.\
\
\'91What impertinence!\'92 said the Pudding. \'91I wonder how you\'92d like it, if I\
were to cut a slice out of YOU, you creature!\'92\
\
It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and Alice hadn\'92t a word to say\
in reply: she could only sit and look at it and gasp.\
\
\'91Make a remark,\'92 said the Red Queen: \'91it\'92s ridiculous to leave all the\
conversation to the pudding!\'92\
\
\'91Do you know, I\'92ve had such a quantity of poetry repeated to me to-day,\'92\
Alice began, a little frightened at finding that, the moment she opened\
her lips, there was dead silence, and all eyes were fixed upon her; \'91and\
it\'92s a very curious thing, I think--every poem was about fishes in some\
way. Do you know why they\'92re so fond of fishes, all about here?\'92\
\
She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer was a little wide of the mark.\
\'91As to fishes,\'92 she said, very slowly and solemnly, putting her mouth\
close to Alice\'92s ear, \'91her White Majesty knows a lovely riddle--all in\
poetry--all about fishes. Shall she repeat it?\'92\
\
\'91Her Red Majesty\'92s very kind to mention it,\'92 the White Queen murmured\
into Alice\'92s other ear, in a voice like the cooing of a pigeon. \'91It\
would be SUCH a treat! May I?\'92\
\
\'91Please do,\'92 Alice said very politely.\
\
The White Queen laughed with delight, and stroked Alice\'92s cheek. Then\
she began:\
\
\
    \'91\'93First, the fish must be caught.\'94\
   That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it.\
    \'93Next, the fish must be bought.\'94\
   That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it.\
\
    \'93Now cook me the fish!\'94\
   That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.\
    \'93Let it lie in a dish!\'94\
   That is easy, because it already is in it.\
\
    \'93Bring it here! Let me sup!\'94\
   It is easy to set such a dish on the table.\
    \'93Take the dish-cover up!\'94\
   Ah, THAT is so hard that I fear I\'92m unable!\
\
    For it holds it like glue--\
  Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle:\
    Which is easiest to do,\
  Un-dish-cover the fish, or dishcover the riddle?\'92\
\
\
\'91Take a minute to think about it, and then guess,\'92 said the Red Queen.\
\'91Meanwhile, we\'92ll drink your health--Queen Alice\'92s health!\'92 she screamed\
at the top of her voice, and all the guests began drinking it directly,\
and very queerly they managed it: some of them put their glasses upon\
their heads like extinguishers, and drank all that trickled down their\
faces--others upset the decanters, and drank the wine as it ran off\
the edges of the table--and three of them (who looked like kangaroos)\
scrambled into the dish of roast mutton, and began eagerly lapping up\
the gravy, \'91just like pigs in a trough!\'92 thought Alice.\
\
\'91You ought to return thanks in a neat speech,\'92 the Red Queen said,\
frowning at Alice as she spoke.\
\
\'91We must support you, you know,\'92 the White Queen whispered, as Alice got\
up to do it, very obediently, but a little frightened.\
\
\'91Thank you very much,\'92 she whispered in reply, \'91but I can do quite well\
without.\'92\
\
\'91That wouldn\'92t be at all the thing,\'92 the Red Queen said very decidedly:\
so Alice tried to submit to it with a good grace.\
\
(\'91And they DID push so!\'92 she said afterwards, when she was telling her\
sister the history of the feast. \'91You would have thought they wanted to\
squeeze me flat!\'92)\
\
In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep in her place while she\
made her speech: the two Queens pushed her so, one on each side, that\
they nearly lifted her up into the air: \'91I rise to return thanks--\'92\
Alice began: and she really DID rise as she spoke, several inches; but\
she got hold of the edge of the table, and managed to pull herself down\
again.\
\
\'91Take care of yourself!\'92 screamed the White Queen, seizing Alice\'92s hair\
with both her hands. \'91Something\'92s going to happen!\'92\
\
And then (as Alice afterwards described it) all sorts of things happened\
in a moment. The candles all grew up to the ceiling, looking something\
like a bed of rushes with fireworks at the top. As to the bottles, they\
each took a pair of plates, which they hastily fitted on as wings, and\
so, with forks for legs, went fluttering about in all directions: \'91and\
very like birds they look,\'92 Alice thought to herself, as well as she\
could in the dreadful confusion that was beginning.\
\
At this moment she heard a hoarse laugh at her side, and turned to see\
what was the matter with the White Queen; but, instead of the Queen,\
there was the leg of mutton sitting in the chair. \'91Here I am!\'92 cried a\
voice from the soup tureen, and Alice turned again, just in time to see\
the Queen\'92s broad good-natured face grinning at her for a moment over\
the edge of the tureen, before she disappeared into the soup.\
\
There was not a moment to be lost. Already several of the guests were\
lying down in the dishes, and the soup ladle was walking up the table\
towards Alice\'92s chair, and beckoning to her impatiently to get out of\
its way.\
\
\'91I can\'92t stand this any longer!\'92 she cried as she jumped up and seized\
the table-cloth with both hands: one good pull, and plates, dishes,\
guests, and candles came crashing down together in a heap on the floor.\
\
\'91And as for YOU,\'92 she went on, turning fiercely upon the Red Queen, whom\
she considered as the cause of all the mischief--but the Queen was no\
longer at her side--she had suddenly dwindled down to the size of a\
little doll, and was now on the table, merrily running round and round\
after her own shawl, which was trailing behind her.\
\
At any other time, Alice would have felt surprised at this, but she was\
far too much excited to be surprised at anything NOW. \'91As for YOU,\'92\
she repeated, catching hold of the little creature in the very act of\
jumping over a bottle which had just lighted upon the table, \'91I\'92ll shake\
you into a kitten, that I will!\'92\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER X. Shaking\
\
She took her off the table as she spoke, and shook her backwards and\
forwards with all her might.\
\
The Red Queen made no resistance whatever; only her face grew very\
small, and her eyes got large and green: and still, as Alice went on\
shaking her, she kept on growing shorter--and fatter--and softer--and\
rounder--and--\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER XI. Waking\
\
--and it really WAS a kitten, after all.\
\
\
\
\
CHAPTER XII. Which Dreamed it?\
\
\'91Your majesty shouldn\'92t purr so loud,\'92 Alice said, rubbing her eyes, and\
addressing the kitten, respectfully, yet with some severity. \'91You\
woke me out of oh! such a nice dream! And you\'92ve been along with me,\
Kitty--all through the Looking-Glass world. Did you know it, dear?\'92\
\
It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice had once made the\
remark) that, whatever you say to them, they ALWAYS purr. \'91If they would\
only purr for \'93yes\'94 and mew for \'93no,\'94 or any rule of that sort,\'92 she had\
said, \'91so that one could keep up a conversation! But how CAN you talk\
with a person if they always say the same thing?\'92\
\
On this occasion the kitten only purred: and it was impossible to guess\
whether it meant \'91yes\'92 or \'91no.\'92\
\
So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the table till she had found the\
Red Queen: then she went down on her knees on the hearth-rug, and put\
the kitten and the Queen to look at each other. \'91Now, Kitty!\'92 she cried,\
clapping her hands triumphantly. \'91Confess that was what you turned\
into!\'92\
\
(\'91But it wouldn\'92t look at it,\'92 she said, when she was explaining the\
thing afterwards to her sister: \'91it turned away its head, and pretended\
not to see it: but it looked a LITTLE ashamed of itself, so I think it\
MUST have been the Red Queen.\'92)\
\
\'91Sit up a little more stiffly, dear!\'92 Alice cried with a merry laugh.\
\'91And curtsey while you\'92re thinking what to--what to purr. It saves time,\
remember!\'92 And she caught it up and gave it one little kiss, \'91just in\
honour of having been a Red Queen.\'92\
\
\'91Snowdrop, my pet!\'92 she went on, looking over her shoulder at the White\
Kitten, which was still patiently undergoing its toilet, \'91when WILL\
Dinah have finished with your White Majesty, I wonder? That must be the\
reason you were so untidy in my dream--Dinah! do you know that you\'92re\
scrubbing a White Queen? Really, it\'92s most disrespectful of you!\
\
\'91And what did DINAH turn to, I wonder?\'92 she prattled on, as she settled\
comfortably down, with one elbow in the rug, and her chin in her hand,\
to watch the kittens. \'91Tell me, Dinah, did you turn to Humpty Dumpty? I\
THINK you did--however, you\'92d better not mention it to your friends just\
yet, for I\'92m not sure.\
\
\'91By the way, Kitty, if only you\'92d been really with me in my dream, there\
was one thing you WOULD have enjoyed--I had such a quantity of poetry\
said to me, all about fishes! To-morrow morning you shall have a real\
treat. All the time you\'92re eating your breakfast, I\'92ll repeat \'93The\
Walrus and the Carpenter\'94 to you; and then you can make believe it\'92s\
oysters, dear!\
\
\'91Now, Kitty, let\'92s consider who it was that dreamed it all. This is a\
serious question, my dear, and you should NOT go on licking your paw\
like that--as if Dinah hadn\'92t washed you this morning! You see, Kitty,\
it MUST have been either me or the Red King. He was part of my dream,\
of course--but then I was part of his dream, too! WAS it the Red King,\
Kitty? You were his wife, my dear, so you ought to know--Oh, Kitty, DO\
help to settle it! I\'92m sure your paw can wait!\'92 But the provoking kitten\
only began on the other paw, and pretended it hadn\'92t heard the question.\
\
Which do YOU think it was?\
\
\
              ----\
\
\
         A boat beneath a sunny sky,\
         Lingering onward dreamily\
         In an evening of July--\
\
         Children three that nestle near,\
         Eager eye and willing ear,\
         Pleased a simple tale to hear--\
\
         Long has paled that sunny sky:\
         Echoes fade and memories die.\
         Autumn frosts have slain July.\
\
         Still she haunts me, phantomwise,\
         Alice moving under skies\
         Never seen by waking eyes.\
\
         Children yet, the tale to hear,\
         Eager eye and willing ear,\
         Lovingly shall nestle near.\
\
         In a Wonderland they lie,\
         Dreaming as the days go by,\
         Dreaming as the summers die:\
\
         Ever drifting down the stream--\
         Lingering in the golden gleam--\
         Life, what is it but a dream?\
\
\
              THE END\
\
\
\
\
\
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Through the Looking-Glass, by\
Charles Dodgson, AKA Lewis Carroll\
\
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS ***\
\
***** This file should be named 12-0.txt or 12-0.zip *****\
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:\
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/12/\
\
\
\
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions\
will be renamed.\
\
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no\
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation\
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without\
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,\
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to\
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to\
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project\
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you\
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you\
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the\
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose\
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and\
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do\
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is\
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial\
redistribution.\
\
\
\
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***\
\
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE\
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK\
\
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free\
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work\
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase \'93Project\
Gutenberg\'94), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project\
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at\
http://gutenberg.org/license).\
\
\
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic works\
\
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to\
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property\
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all\
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy\
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.\
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the\
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or\
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.\
\
1.B.  \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 is a registered trademark.  It may only be\
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who\
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few\
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works\
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See\
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement\
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.\
\
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (\'93the Foundation\'94\
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the\
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an\
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are\
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from\
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative\
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg\
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project\
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by\
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of\
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with\
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by\
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project\
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.\
\
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern\
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in\
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check\
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement\
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or\
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project\
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning\
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United\
States.\
\
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:\
\
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate\
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently\
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the\
phrase \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 appears, or with which the phrase \'93Project\
Gutenberg\'94 is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,\
copied or distributed:\
\
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with\
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or\
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included\
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org\
\
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived\
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is\
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied\
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees\
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work\
with the phrase \'93Project Gutenberg\'94 associated with or appearing on the\
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1\
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the\
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or\
1.E.9.\
\
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted\
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution\
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional\
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked\
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the\
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.\
\
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this\
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.\
\
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this\
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without\
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with\
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm License.\
\
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,\
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any\
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or\
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than\
\'93Plain Vanilla ASCII\'94 or other format used in the official version\
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),\
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a\
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon\
request, of the work in its original \'93Plain Vanilla ASCII\'94 or other\
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.\
\
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,\
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works\
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.\
\
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing\
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided\
that\
\
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from\
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method\
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is\
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he\
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the\
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments\
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you\
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax\
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and\
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the\
     address specified in Section 4, \'93Information about donations to\
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.\'94\
\
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies\
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he\
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm\
     License.  You must require such a user to return or\
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium\
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of\
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.\
\
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any\
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the\
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days\
     of receipt of the work.\
\
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free\
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.\
\
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm\
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set\
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from\
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael\
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the\
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.\
\
1.F.\
\
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable\
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread\
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm\
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain\
\'93Defects,\'94 such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or\
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual\
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a\
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by\
your equipment.\
\
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the \'93Right\
of Replacement or Refund\'94 described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project\
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project\
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all\
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal\
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT\
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE\
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE\
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE\
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR\
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH\
DAMAGE.\
\
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a\
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can\
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a\
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you\
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with\
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with\
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a\
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity\
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to\
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy\
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further\
opportunities to fix the problem.\
\
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth\
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you \'91AS-IS\'92 WITH NO OTHER\
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO\
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.\
\
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied\
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.\
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the\
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be\
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by\
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any\
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.\
\
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the\
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone\
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance\
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,\
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,\
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,\
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do\
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm\
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any\
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.\
\
\
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of\
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers\
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists\
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from\
people in all walks of life.\
\
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the\
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm\'92s\
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will\
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project\
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure\
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.\
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation\
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4\
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.\
\
\
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive\
Foundation\
\
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit\
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the\
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal\
Revenue Service.  The Foundation\'92s EIN or federal tax identification\
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at\
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg\
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent\
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state\'92s laws.\
\
The Foundation\'92s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.\
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered\
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at\
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email\
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact\
information can be found at the Foundation\'92s web site and official\
page at http://pglaf.org\
\
For additional contact information:\
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby\
     Chief Executive and Director\
     gbnewby@pglaf.org\
\
\
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg\
Literary Archive Foundation\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide\
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of\
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be\
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest\
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations\
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt\
status with the IRS.\
\
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating\
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United\
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a\
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up\
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations\
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To\
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any\
particular state visit http://pglaf.org\
\
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we\
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition\
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who\
approach us with offers to donate.\
\
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make\
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from\
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.\
\
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation\
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other\
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.\
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate\
\
\
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic\
works.\
\
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm\
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared\
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project\
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.\
\
\
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed\
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.\
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily\
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.\
\
\
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:\
\
     http://www.gutenberg.org\
\
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,\
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary\
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to\
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.\
}